{#THE DEW}
{3}
THE DEW
@Deuteronomy 32: 1 - 3; @Daniel 4: 33 - 37; @Micah 5: 7 - 9
I desire to engage our thoughts for a few moments with the immense power that is available to the saints in what is represented as the dew. Amongst the weapons of our warfare (which are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds) perhaps one of the greatest weapons available is the dew. One feels how often we fail to realise what can be accomplished with dew.
The scripture I read in @Deuteronomy 32, speaking no doubt of the Lord Jesus pre-eminently, says, “My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the dew.” The dew, I take it, refers to the gracious, gentle, blessed influences of heaven; it is the dew of heaven. Joseph is blessed with “the precious things of heaven ... the dew.” The Lord Jesus Christ, the true Joseph, and the true Moses, was down here in this world covered with dew. It did not descend upon Him; He corresponds with Mount Hermon; of which it is said, “The dew of Hermon.”
{4}
That is to say, the Lord Jesus Christ, as a blessed Man upon earth, morally was so exalted, He extended into heaven itself; the dew was native to His blessed Person. It descends as the dew of Hermon that descended upon the mountains of Zion, and the Lord Jesus Christ towered up into heaven as He walked through this world, and the dew was upon Him everywhere. It was a mighty power; it came out particularly in His doctrine and in His words. Just listen to some of His doctrine: “Blessed are the poor in spirit.” That doctrine fell upon the ears and hearts of those that listened to it as the very rain from heaven; it rained upon them because He Himself was the expression of what He said, hence the power of it.
With what gracious influence of heaven His doctrine would fall upon those that heard! who so poor in spirit? He adorned the doctrine. What a wonderful thing the apostle refers to in Titus, that the doctrine looks better with us attached to it than without us, that the doctrine would not look so well if we were missing. Is that so? “Adorn,” it says, “the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things.” The Lord Jesus adorned His doctrine. Who so poor in spirit as He was; His whole pathway was marked by perfect dependence upon God, never a movement of self-complacency or self-sufficiency;
{5}
He was dependent to the last, going down even unto death as poor in spirit: “Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.” He went there confident, in dependence upon God even to the grave.
What blessed words the Lord utters in another of His doctrines: “Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.” The doctrine came down as the gracious, gentle influence of heaven supported by the meekest Man in all the earth. What do you think of meekness such as this: All sin and blasphemy against the Son of man shall be forgiven. Think of it, He says that for those who blaspheme His blessed name there is forgiveness. Never before was meekness like that! The Lord Jesus in His doctrine supported it by what He was, and it dropped down, not as arbitrary commands, not as doctrinal statements, which must be obeyed, but it dropped down as rain into every heart that appreciated it.
And then it says, “My speech shall distil as the dew.” Think of His speech, think of His gracious words coming into the souls of men like the dew. The Lord stood up in @Luke 4, with all the dew of heaven upon Him when “He began to say” (Luke never tells us that He finished). He stood up with the dew of
{6}
heaven upon Him, and every word distilled as the dew. We cannot touch on all His words -- every one of them infinitely precious -- but one would turn in thought to one or two occasions when He spoke. Think of the Lord drawing near to the city of Nain, and His saying to the woman, “Weep not.” He brought the influence of heaven into the soul of that poor woman -- His words distil as the dew. And when Simon Peter stood in the house of the high priest, a self-confident heart, a man who did not know his own heart, who approached evil in confidence instead of fear and trembling, who denied with oaths and curses that he knew the Lord, it says, “Jesus looked upon him,” and carried into his soul the very grace, the very gentleness of heaven, so that it broke his heart, for it says, “he went out, and wept bitterly.”
And then think of His words on the cross. In that dark and terrible scene, indescribably dark, encompassed by the hatred of the human heart, the dew of Hermon descends upon it all -- “My speech shall distil as the dew” He says, “Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do”; the dew of heaven, so powerful in its mighty effect that a man who had lived all his life in sin and darkness and evil is turned right about. The malefactor says, “We indeed justly” (he judged himself
{7}
under the power of the dew), “but this man hath done nothing amiss.” “Lord,” he says, “remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom.”
One calls attention to this because the dew is to come upon the mountains of Zion, that is to say, upon each one of us; we are all mountains of Zion. We have all been set up in relation to Christ on the principle of sovereign mercy, and the same blessed dew of Hermon is to descend on the mountains of Zion, and our doctrines are to drop as the rain. If our doctrines drop in any other way, they will not accomplish anything; there will be no power in them. We may speak ever so correctly of doctrine, but does it come down upon the saints as the rain, the gentle, blessed, gracious influence of heaven? It will accomplish much like that. And our words, do they distil as the dew? What are the words we use towards one another? “My speech,” says the Lord, “shall distil as the dew.” What was true in such blessed pre-eminence in Him is also to be true in the mountains of Zion.
One word more as to what the dew can accomplish. The influence of heaven creates a condition for the manna to fall upon; you can never get manna until you have the dew. The manna does not fall upon the earth, and it does not fall upon hearts engulfed in business,
{8}
and it does not fall in newspapers either, it falls upon the dew. Where you have the gracious, blessed influence of heaven, there you have the manna. You will get the manna morning by morning. Under the blessed influence of heaven we can get the bread of the mighty, so that we can proceed on our way through the wilderness energised by the bread of heaven, by the food of the mighty. Think of Caleb, he ate that bread to such an extent that when he was an old man he said he was just as he was forty years before. Of Moses, too, it is said his strength remained in him, he never got weak. The influence of heaven in this town, in every place, makes room for the manna to fall, makes room for that wonderful food, so small, so round, so white, like coriander seed, tasting of the sweetness of honey. But if we have not the influence of heaven -- the dew -- no manna can come. Let the influence of heaven be present, and the manna can fall each morning, so that we move through this wilderness in correspondence with the manna; we become small, we become round -- no jagged, awkward corners -- we become white, we feed upon the sweetness of the grace of God.
What wonderful provision the dew is for every one of us. Who would leave the influence of heaven and run to feed upon the sink of
{9}
corruption in this world? Who would go there when they can have the manna by abiding under the influence of heaven?
One would pass on in order that we might get a little sense of the immense power of the dew in the case of Nebuchadnezzar. But first of all it might be well to refer to Gideon. Gideon had to face conflict with the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of the East. The Midianite is a terrible man, he trades in the things of God. He is prepared to buy and sell Joseph; he is prepared to barter in the things of God for his own gain. He is a terrible enemy, and Gideon is called upon by the Lord to meet him in conflict. Gideon was the least in his father’s house, and one who had no idea of personal greatness, no sense of what he could accomplish; and it says the Lord looked upon him, delighted to find a man like that. I wonder if the Lord can look upon us like that? And He says, “Go in this thy might”; and so he is to face the enemies.
Gideon is very anxious that he should not move a step towards the camp of the enemy till he is perfectly satisfied he knows where the dew is; he must know where the dew is before he will move, because if he is going to move, he must move in accordance with the dew. He cannot go on until he is quite sure
{10}
he has the influence of heaven with him. Is that how we approach conflict? Have we got some difficulty to face, some question of the rights of the Lord? Never move at all until you are quite sure the dew is with you. With the dew with us we are sure of victory, because we have the influence of heaven; we shall not be using carnal weapons, we shall be moving in the power of the dew.
Now I would like to indicate what wonderful things can be done with the dew if we can wait for the dew to work. Think of Nebuchadnezzar, lifted up in pride and self-will and cruelty, prepared to cast men into burning fiery furnaces; there he is against the people of God, against God, and what will God do with that great adversary, that immense difficulty that exists, how will it be met? God says, I will bathe him for seven years with the dew, that will alter him. Have we sought to meet our difficulties like that? Dear brother or sister, have you a difficulty with any one? Try bathing them with the dew; do it for seven years; that is how God acts. It will break down a Nebuchadnezzar. Under the gracious, gentle influence of heaven for seven years, his understanding returned to him, and he moved on the rest of his days magnifying and honouring the King of heaven. His greatness, his position, his enmity to God had gone,
{11}
his hostility to the people of God is over. “Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and Honour the King of heaven.” Who would ever have thought that the dew could do that, who would have contemplated that it was possible that seven years of bathing with the dew of heaven would transform that hard, bitter man into one of the servants of God? Let us try it; wonderful things have been done before today by approaching a difficulty with the dew; by gathering it from Christ -- that is the test.
You say, How can I do it? None of us can do it of ourselves, but the dew descends from Hermon to the mountains of Zion. Surround that blessed Man, dear brethren, keep in touch with that blessed One, and the dew descends. It is not native to us, not to any of us, but if we are near to Him in our affections wonderful things can be done with the dew of Hermon which descends upon the mountains of Zion. Brethren can be together in unity there, “Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!” We dwell together in unity where the dew descends from heaven to the mountains of Zion. “There the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.”
Now the scripture in Micah shews us that there may come a time when the dew is not
{12}
effective. The Lord Jesus knew the power of the dew. He moved through this world bedewing people’s souls with the very grace of heaven, and, indeed, the dew was equally applied to Judas, but that man was unresponsive to it. One marvels at the infinite patience of the Lord with Judas. He never exposed him during the three and a half years. The disciples at the end had no idea who it was that should betray Him; the Lord had treated him in the same gracious, blessed way that He had treated them all. So we learn the divine order in Micah. Jacob is first of all to be as dew. “The remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people as a dew.” If that is not effective then the remnant of Jacob shall be as a lion. That is exactly what happened, and the Lord eventually had to roar at Judas as a lion. He had to reject him, but the dew had been refused, the blessed influence of heaven had not been responded to. But mark the patience first.
Now in the Book of Daniel the same principle is observed. The dew breaks the heart of Nebuchadnezzar and his will, but Belshazzar his son, who knew of it, was not affected by it, and the judgment of God fell upon him. But the thing to be observed by us all is that the remnant of Jacob shall be as the dew among many people. Let us first of all meet
{13}
every difficulty with the dew. I do not say there may not be a time when we shall have to be as a lion, but the point for each one of us to lay hold of is the immense power that is in the dew to bring in the gracious, blessed influence of heaven.
The Lord Jesus when He went up to heaven still had the dew, and from heaven He bedewed the soul of Saul of Tarsus until it broke his heart. Saul of Tarsus corresponds with Nebuchadnezzar, breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, an insolent, overbearing man. Have we a difficulty like that to meet? The Lord bedewed his soul with the dew of heaven, and it broke his heart and his will. He surrendered under the power of the dew, and he says, “I beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ.” We can trust that weapon to do almost anything if only we will use it. Difficulties between brethren and between sisters will vanish if the mighty weapons of the meekness and gentleness of Christ are laid hold of, but how it tests where we are. The dew is there upon Hermon; it is to be had by nearness to Christ. There is no difficulty about getting the dew. The Lord Jesus is blessed with the blessings of the dew. He has got them, but we have to go to Him for them. The apostle had to roar as a lion
{14}
in regard to one of the Corinthians; the dew had not affected him, and he says, “Put away that wicked person,” but in regard to them as a people he bedewed their souls with the grace of heaven. He made clear to them that whatever they did to him, whether they spake against him, or contrasted him with other apostles, it did not alter his love for them. Thus he says, “I will very gladly spend and be spent for you; though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved.” That mountain of Zion was so near to Hermon that he met things in the grace of Christ.
One greatly desires that we might get a sense of what can be done with the dew. If Saul of Tarsus can be converted, and if Nebuchadnezzar can be transformed into a servant of God, magnifying and honouring the King of heaven, then what can the dew not do? The difficulty is that we know so little about waiting. God was prepared to go on bedewing Nebuchadnezzar for seven long years before He would give him up. If we are prepared to follow the divine example we can accomplish wonders in the power and influence of the grace of heaven.
May the Lord help us then to really appreciate what is possible if we attack difficulties in the grace of heaven, the weapons of our warfare, and we shall find there is mighty
{15}
power to break up the hard clods with the dew. The hard hearts that have been unmoved by the repetition of right statements and correct doctrine, the grace of heaven will break such hearts and transform them for the service of the Lord.
{16}
“MANHOOD”
@Numbers 12: 1 - 8; @Esther 9: 3, 4; @Daniel 9: 20 - 24; @1 Timothy 2: 5
I have read these scriptures to bring one thought before us, that is, the thought of manhood according to God. Manhood involves maturity. With the end of this dispensation at hand, I am sure God is seeking to bring His work to maturity in us. It has often been pointed out that, at the close of the world He destroyed in the days of Noah, God took out of it what was mature -- Noah, his wife, his three sons and their wives. There were no children, denoting thus that God secured what was developed ere He destroyed the world that so grieved Him. I believe that God is working to have that result in His people now. The work of God, and the work of the devil, is matured at the end of every dispensation. In the ante-diluvian world, the devil had giants, he had men of name, matured in wickedness, and God had those He saved who were mature through His work.
God is bringing before us the thought of sonship; He is bringing many sons to glory -- not children, but sons. That is the great thought God has for His people today -- sons
{17}
representing maturity. On the other hand, there are at the end those whom the Lord speaks of as the sons of the wicked one, not children, not infants, but *sons* of the wicked one. These will find a head in the son of perdition, a dreadful title -- not a child in perdition’s ways, but a fully developed man in the ways of hell -- such will be the crown of Satan’s work.
I do not speak against the thought of a babe -- in its proper setting, nothing is more beautiful than a babe, but who would like a babe to remain a babe? How sad if one were to remain a little child. God’s thought dear brethren, is *manhood*. As to the eternal condition it says, “the tabernacle of God is with men” -- not only *man* as a race, but with *men*. God will have in maturity those with whom He can dwell.
I would refer now to the scriptures read, in order to bring features of manhood before us. First, in ‘the man Moses’, then ‘the man Mordecai’, then ‘the man Gabriel’, (he was an angel, but he is called ‘the man Gabriel’ because in him is set out features that God would have in man) and finally, eternally, and beyond compare, ‘the Man Christ Jesus’. How perfect and varied are the features of manhood set out in the Man Christ Jesus!
{18}
I would like to touch on certain features of manhood seen in the first three, and to say a word as to how every feature of manhood, God would have seen in man, is expressed in Christ.
We read of Moses as a babe -- and as such he wept. We read “By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid.” @Hebrews 11: 23. I would say to parents that if you want manhood in your children, you must begin early to hide them. That is faith’s line. Then “Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter.” @Hebrews 11: 24. He refused to find his life in this world, but chose “rather to suffer affliction along with the people of God than to have the temporary pleasure of sin; esteeming the reproach of the Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt.” @Hebrews 11: 25 - 26.
You can thus see manhood in the making. When we see lads and young women turn their backs on the world, identifying themselves with the people of God, we can see manhood coming into view. There are great possibilities for such.
For forty years Moses is in the desert attending to sheep, and it says he was content. I do not think manhood according to God will be developed if we are discontented in the circumstances God puts us in. If you
{19}
want to be a man, according to this pattern, accept contentedly the ways of God. Moses was content, and he never took himself out of those circumstances until God took him out of them.
Later Moses must learn further lessons if he is to be ‘the man Moses’; he must learn what becomes of a rod cast on the ground. It becomes a serpent -- authority entrusted to man, apart from divine control, becomes Satanic -- a most important thing to learn.
Then he must learn what is in his own bosom -- God says to him, “Put now thy hand into thy bosom,” @Exodus 4: 6, and it comes out leprous. That is one of the great lessons on the road to true manhood. We must know what is in our own bosoms, and learn how God can deal with it, and break its power. Many are detained at this point for years because they do not learn the lesson, that “in me, that is, in my flesh, good does not dwell:” @Romans 7: 18. Yet God can break the power of sin in the flesh. I do not pursue the lessons Moses learnt until we come to the passage in @Numbers 12. What glorious features of manhood come out in a few words. Miriam and Aaron speak against Moses, no doubt moved by envy -- “Has Jehovah indeed spoken only to Moses? has he not spoken also to us?” verse 2. Envy is not a feature of manhood, it
{20}
is a feature of infancy, indeed the evidence of a dwarfed state. In this matter, Miriam and Aaron were dwarfed, but it says “The man Moses was very meek, above all men that were upon the face of the earth,” verse 3. Meekness is an outstanding feature of manhood. How far away man has got from the divine standard of manhood as found in this feature of meekness!
Moses did not say a word to assert his rights in this matter. God had something to say, not Moses, but it is in that connection that he is called ‘the man Moses’. I commend it to all here, that one great feature of manhood is meekness as to our own rights. As to the rights of God. Moses had much to say, but as to his own, he had nothing to say. That is manhood.
In addition, God tells us more, He says, “My servant Moses,” verse 7. Manhood according to God is that we are His servants; no one is a man according to God unless He is serving God. If we are not serving God, then we are not men according to the divine thought of God for men. “My servant Moses: he is faithful in all my house.” -- another great feature of manhood is faithfulness.
God adds further as to Moses: “Mouth to mouth do I speak to him openly.” I know Moses represents Christ pre-eminently in this
{21}
matter, but I believe one feature of full manhood is that there is power to have communion with God, not through visions and dreams, but directly.
Manhood as seen in Moses includes meekness, readiness to serve God, faithfulness in His house, and communion with God. The world does not know anything of such manhood -- such persons would not be regarded as men in the world. These are some of the features of ‘the man Moses’ -- may they be ours in some degree!
I refer to ‘the man Mordecai’. What a man he was! He was great, and he waxed greater and greater. He lived in quite a different day from that of Moses. In Moses¬ day, God was directly and manifestly with His people. But in the book of Esther you do not even get the name of God mentioned. God had withdrawn from public identification with His people; and yet we read in that very time of ‘the man Mordecai’, and through him the whole scheme to destroy God’s people was brought to nothing.
We are living in such a day as Mordecai -- God has withdrawn Himself from publicly supporting His people. In the beginning of Acts, God was manifestly with His people -- “the Lord working with them, confirming
{22}
the word with signs following,” @Mark 16: 20. Who could question that the Lord was with the early church in a marvellous way? But now, we are in the days of captivity as the book of Esther presents, and the Lord is not publicly supporting anything -- nowhere will you find manifest any public support of the Lord such as the natural mind can take account of. The Lord in that way has withdrawn. All claims as to miracles and the like taking place now are deception. Where there are conditions that He can support, He does, but in a hidden way as in this book.
What marks the man Mordecai is that in such a dark day as the captivity in Babylon, he is still governed by the divine mind; he has no lesser standard than what is according to the command of God. So that when the edict goes out that everyone should reverence an Amalekite, “Mordecai bowed not”, for God had said that He would have “war with Amalek from generation to generation,” @Exodus 17: 16. ‘But’, one might say, ‘It does not matter now, things are in pieces, why should he be guided by a scripture given to Israel in the beginning?’ It says, “But Mordecai bowed not”; he refused to obey the king if obedience meant setting aside the will of God. Here is a man! Under all circumstances he is governed by the known mind of God. How
{23}
much we need this feature now, and will need it more. The known mind of God is to be the final word, cost what it may.
Another feature of manhood is that Mordecai has sackcloth and ashes -- a humble minded man with a sense of the failure that has marked God’s people, and the need for repentance. This is represented in the sackcloth and ashes. He has them, and uses them. In the darkest day he has confidence; he is not in despair. He makes clear to Esther that deliverance will come in from some quarter, but it will come. Despair is not a feature of manhood -- confidence in God is. He speaks peace to all his people. He brings in the element of peace amongst the people of God. May the Lord help us to be such as ‘the man Mordecai’ as well as ‘the man Moses’. God has manhood in Mordecai and He wants that reflected in us. We do not expect God, today, to publicly show His hand of approval anywhere until the Lord comes, but we do know that where there is that which is pleasing to Him. He will overrule things and bring the counsel of the evil one to nought. So Haman goes on to the gallows that had been prepared for Mordecai. God justifying His servant because of true features of manhood in him according to God.
Now I would say a word as to ‘the man
{24}
Gabriel’. How much we can learn from Gabriel! A voice comes to Gabriel, “Make this man to understand,” @Daniel 8: 16. Not only has Gabriel himself understanding but he has the power to make others understand. What a precious development of manhood that is! Later ‘the man Gabriel’ says, “I am now come forth to make thee skilful of understanding,” @Daniel 9: 22.
Another thing that marks Gabriel, as recorded in Scripture, is interest, and pleasure too, in the prayers of God’s people. I do not mean prayers like Jacob’s -- “If God will be with me, and keep me on this road ... , then shall Jehovah be my God ... “ @Genesis 28: 20 - 21. I do not know that Gabriel was particularly interested in that prayer, but when Daniel prays, we read, “at the beginning of thy supplications the word went forth,” chapter 9: 23. Daniel prayed, owning his sin and that of his people, praying that God would shine upon His sanctuary, would forgive, and bless His people, and honour His Name. When Zacharias prayed in the temple, Gabriel says, “Thy prayer is heard,” @Luke 1: 13. He does not say who heard it, doubtless Gabriel heard it amongst others. When Zacharias says, “How shall I know this?” he says, “I am Gabriel, who stand before God.” This surely is a feature of true
{25}
manhood. What it would be if there were twenty brothers and sisters standing before God in this district! What does that mean? That such are available. “I am Gabriel, who stand before God,” ready for whatever God wants done through His servant. Elijah was such a man; he says, “As the Lord ... liveth, before whom I stand,” @1 Kings 17: l. Dear brethren and sisters this is manhood! -- to be available to God. It is not a question of saying ‘What can I do?’ Gabriel says, “I am Gabriel, who stand before God.” In the book of Daniel, we are told that ten thousand times ten thousand stand before Him. Every one standing there available. Let us take into our hearts that manhood is marked by a deep interest in the welfare of the saints and their prayers; a readiness to impart such understanding we may have; a readiness to stand before God as available as needed.
There are other features -- Gabriel says of Daniel “a man greatly beloved,” @Daniel 10: 11. Ability to appreciate others who are loved by God marks Gabriel; he did not think that Daniel was detracting from him and that if Daniel is greatly beloved, there will be less appreciation of Gabriel. No, he says, “a man greatly beloved.” He delighted in the pleasure of God in others. Such is manhood.
{26}
Anything different from this is childish, and calls for self-judgment.
Gabriel counts the weeks until Christ the Prince comes in. Manhood according to God is always watching for Christ to come in. All is reckoned up in the light of when Christ will come in; thus it was with Gabriel when he announced the birth of Jesus for it is Gabriel that comes to Mary saying, “Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee,” @Luke 1: 28; then Gabriel tells of the coming of Christ -- “That holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God” @Luke 1: 35. The Spirit of God calls him “the man Gabriel”. How we are measured by these men! We put ourselves beside Moses, and Mordecai, and Gabriel, and we are consciously small. Nevertheless, let us see God’s thoughts, let us see the pattern, and God would help us to make room for these holy features in our souls.
I close with a word as to “the Man Christ Jesus.” What can be said of such a title, “Christ Jesus”! It denotes that God has expressed in totality His thoughts in relation to manhood. He is the Beginning and the End, the First and the Last. The beginning of true manhood is in Christ, the end of true manhood is in Christ. What constituted the manhood of Moses, of Mordecai and of
{27}
Gabriel, is expressed, perfectly, in “the Man Christ Jesus”, but infinitely more is also seen in Him. What was seen of God in Adam, namely headship in a man, is found in the Man Christ Jesus, the *last* Adam -- there could not be another! What was of God in righteous Abel, is seen perfectly in Christ. What was in Enoch, a man who walked with God, is seen perfectly in Christ. What was in Noah, a preacher of righteousness, in Abraham, the friend of God, in Isaac, the heavenly man, in Jacob, the supplanter of the first man, in Joseph, the fruitful bough -- what was of God, in every man that ever lived, resides in the Man Christ Jesus; in character it really came from Him. There is not one single thought God ever desired to be seen in man but is resident in eternal perfection in the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a ransom for all. I think this great act of *giving Himself* expresses manhood in supreme perfection. What a contrast to the men of this world! What a contrast to world leaders that have caused such a torrent of blood to flow today. Such do not give themselves. Such do not surrender themselves. Here is the Man Christ Jesus who gave Himself. What a feature! This blessed Man is necessarily, and rightly, eternally first. He is the second Man out of heaven and the
{28}
second takes the place of the first. “The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven.” @1 Corinthians 15: 47. He is Man. The Lord Jesus Christ is not an angel but has become Man, and as such He has given Himself; He will put His blessed impress on all who are His: “As we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly,” @1 Corinthians 15: 49. The Lord as Man is going to give His blessed impress to all who are His, so that we take character from the Man Christ Jesus.
The Apostle says, “In malice be babes; but in your minds be grown men,” @1 Corinthians 14: 20. This can only be as we derive from Christ, take character from Christ, and the Spirit is here for that purpose that He may form the believer after the pattern of the Man Christ Jesus who gave Himself a ransom for all. What is so wonderful, as to the last Adam, is that He took on Himself the burden of all that the first Adam brought in. The first Adam brought in sin, death, burial, and the *last* Adam took all that woe and burden and put it away. He is the life-giving Spirit. As such He is the last Adam -- there can be no other.
Moses expressed some features of Christ, Mordecai expressed some features of Christ, Gabriel expressed some features of Christ,
{29}
but every blessed feature is resident in Him, and we have His Spirit: “He breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit,” so that we may take character from the Man Christ Jesus, and thus be here in manhood.
The more we make room for this, the more we shall reach the great end God has in view. I do commend this to all, in view of the closing up of this dispensation so rapidly, that God is working to have maturity in His people, manhood according to Himself.
