{#THE TEMPLE OF GOD}
{9}
IS THY HEART RIGHT?
@2 Kings 10: 15-17; @Hosea 2: 14-17; @Revelation 3: 14-22
The question put by Jehu is a question which the Lord would wish to raise at the present time among the saints -- "Is thy heart right, as my heart is with thy heart?"
As for the Lord, we can be assured that His heart is right. He says, "My heart is with thy heart". But is *our* heart right? Can we give Him our hand as a sign that we are right? Jehu says to Jonadab, "If it be, give me thy hand".
Here, it is a question of idolatry. Jehu was going to destroy Baal; he was not going to *save* Ahab and his sons and Jezebel; now he was going to destroy all the priests of Baal, so that God should be supreme.
"Is thy heart right?" Do you have an idol in your heart, or are you with Me? Dear brethren, since we are to be taken by the Lord, idols must be removed from our hearts. In Christendom, idolatry reigns;
{10}
idols abound there -- not just idols of wood and stone. "Children", says the apostle John, "keep yourselves from idols". What is the goal of our life? Are we living for ourselves? Is there something outside of Jesus which directs our life? The second epistle to Timothy speaks of many idols -- "In the last days ... men shall be lovers of self, lovers of money", self becoming an idol, "lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God". These things are idols.
So the Lord asks, "Is thy heart right?" Are we with Him in judging that which is not according to Himself, judging idols, so that He might be supreme. At the beginning of the assembly's history, there were no idols among Christians; all things were common to them. The Lord had such a place in hearts that nothing came between them and Him; now this is what He would wish to produce in the assembly today. When a bride's wedding day comes, her heart is right; no-one occupies her husband's place. This is what the Lord awaits from His own.
Is our heart right? Can we give Him our hand? Jehu says, "Give me thy hand". What do we have in our hands? Are they clean? Are they holy?
{11}
The Lord is looking at them. When we come to the prayer meeting, are we ready to "lift up pious hands, without wrath or reasoning" (@1 Timothy 2: 8)? God sees the state of our hands.
I think that the passage which we have read in @Hosea 2 will be able to help us. The Lord said, "Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak to her heart". He would wish to present Himself to us in such a way that we would be ready to go into the desert, drawn by His affection -- there He will speak to our heart. It is what He does at the supper. The supper takes place in the wilderness; it is there that He speaks to our heart. He says, "My heart is right". Every time we break bread He says, "This is my body, which is given for you" and "this cup is the new covenant in My blood, which is poured out for you". The heart of the Lord is right. What about our heart? I think that, every first day of the week, the supper tests us; are we able to respond to the Lord's invitation? Dear brethren, can we say to Him, "My husband".
"And it shall be in that day, saith Jehovah, that thou shalt call me, My husband, and shalt call me no more, Baali (my master)". To call him "My husband" is to say that He is supreme
{12}
in our heart. He would wish to remove the word Baal from our mouth -- "I will take away the names of the Baals out of her mouth". There are many Baals in this world, "lords many" (@1 Corinthians 8: 5); but for us there is a single Lord who desires that we should be able to say to Him, "My husband". So, week after week, He comes to us and He says, "My heart is right; the love found there is perfect; nothing is lacking there". But He wishes to know if our heart is right in relation to His. Dear brethren, can we say to Him, "My husband?" Would He have a rival? Would other things occupy our heart? Or can we say truly, "My husband". It is in this way that we break bread, in refusal of the Baals; the Lord is our only Lord, our husband.
We find the same thought in @Revelation 3. The Lord is knocking at the door. This door is the heart of the assembly. Laodicea's public position is false -- the Lord is outside. Laodicea says, "I am rich, and am grown rich, and have need of nothing"; but the Lord is outside. This is how things are in the professing church and it is precisely what we have to overcome, dear brethren. There can be claim to having everything, when, in fact, nothing is possessed -- the Lord is
{13}
outside. He says, "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking"; He desires to enter our heart, but in order for Him to enter, our heart must be right.
He continues -- "if *any one* ...open the door, I will come in unto him..." The assembly will never be recovered publicly, because it has left its first love. This is the Lord's reproach to Ephesus, where hearts had become distanced from Him -- "… thou hast left thy first love"; hearts were not right in relation to His heart. But the Lord says to Laodicea, "If any one ... open"; He addresses individuals. The Lord is working to recover each heart to the truth of the assembly.
"If any one ... open the door, *I will come in*". He can only enter the heart that is right. This is what happens each Lord's Day -- the Lord knocks at the door of our heart to see if He can enter; if there are idols, He will not be able to enter. He stands outside for as long as other things occupy His place.
But He desires that we should open the door. As this happens, He says, "I will come in unto him and sup with him ... ". Could anything be more precious? He will sup with us; He will come where we are, here
{14}
in the wilderness; if the door is open, He will enter. Do we know a little of this? When we gather, do we prove the reality of His presence? His desire is that we should have the consciousness of His presence on Lord's Day morning. Oh! how we should desire it! How worthy it is of our joy! Let us not rest without it. May we not be satisfied with any external form of things! We need nothing but His presence and we can enjoy it if we are free from idols, if our heart is right, if we open the door to Him.
We thus allow nothing to occupy the place which belongs to the Lord. He comes in and sups *with* us, here where we are; we have His blessed presence and we delight in it.
But this is not all; if things are thus, He then says that such will sup *with Him*. Words cannot express what that means; it is too great to be described by words.
"I will ... sup with him" is the Lord coming to where I am, in the wilderness, while the night of His betrayal continues, in the place where we have to judge what is unholy, where all the priests of Baal are put to death.
{15}
"And he with me". I think, dear brethren, that this is something which should be known. I do not know if the saints here enjoy this, if they know what it is to leave our sphere here in the wilderness, in order to enter in spirit where He is. Lazarus in resurrection was "with him" here, "one of those at table with him". Peter, James and John were "with him" on the holy mountain.
So then, if the door is opened, the saints receive Him where they are. But after the supper, if we are ready for it, He leads us in spirit to where He is. After the supper, they sang a hymn and went to the mount of Olives; it is the place where there is contact with heaven, where everything is spiritual. He leads us to the Father. We read in @John 14, "I am coming again and shall receive you to myself, that where I am ye also may be".
Dear brethren, this may be known now in some measure. How we would desire that each heart might be more attached to Him, to remove all idols so that the hand can be given to Him with uprightness of heart. So then we shall hear Him speak to our heart and we shall be able to say to Him in all truth, "My husband". If it is thus, as He knocks, the
{16}
door opens, He comes in and He gives us to have the joy of His presence just where we are. Then, in our spirits, He transports us to where He is. This is the most precious thing in our life; nothing like it can be known by the heart of the saints. To enter briefly where He is, in the consciousness and joy of our position in the Beloved, the love of the Father resting on us, Christ dwelling in our heart, what an infinitely precious part to which nothing can be compared.
In the book of Hosea, the Lord speaks of another door and this door is of the greatest importance. It refers to the valley of Achor which is "a door of hope", a door giving access to wonderful blessings. This is the valley in which Achan was stoned to death; there we have to judge everything which is Babylonish. Achan had taken a Babylonish garment; this is judged in the valley of Achor in such a way that the valley becomes a door of hope.
We are called to face up to this matter of idolatry. It will cause agony, trouble without which there will be no hope. What are our motives? What is hidden from the eyes of all is exposed to the eyes of the Lord, which makes it necessary to examine our friendships, what we
{17}
read and what we do. All these things entail trouble (Achor means trouble) and the flesh recoils from this thought but the valley of trouble is the door of hope through which we pass so that Christ may be called "my husband". It is the place of the assembly prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. It is a relationship which each of us can know individually. What we are collectively depends on what we are individually.
Let us suppose that there is a small group of believers in Paris whose heart is undivided, who belong entirely to the Lord. They come together; how quickly the door opens! How easy it is, then, to say, "my husband". We have to face up to this individually. We are often grieved by the weakness of the meetings but if there is weakness in the meetings, it is because there is weakness individually. "Is thy heart right?" Let us ask ourselves individually, "Is my heart right?" May each take it to heart for himself, in order to give Christ the place of the husband in our secret life and that fresh days may be known in meetings. He will knock at the door at the occasion of the supper; the door
{18}
will open, we shall know the blessing of His presence and He will raise us to the level of heaven in our spirits, for, from that point, we can enter there by the Spirit.
I think that the proposal made to Laodicea is of the greatest importance at the present time. Shall we be satisfied by having only the form of things without His presence? He hates that. "I would thou wert cold or hot". He wishes to be able to enter and we desire that He should enter. The secret is the judgement of idolatry. Jehu says to Jonadab, "Come with me". He showed him how he would destroy the idols, the entire system of Baal. Jonadab accompanied him with purpose of heart in the refusal of idolatry. This is what we must do, dear brethren, so that none should occupy Christ's place. We can say to Him, "my husband". He will come in unto us and sup with us and we with Him. To be conscious of His presence, to enter in spirit where He is, to realise that where He is, we are also with Him is more than words can express.
May the Lord give us, in this locality, to enjoy a little of this. He awaits that thus it should be, so that the Spirit and the bride should say, "Come". When the bride says, "Come", her heart is right. The Lord
{19}
desires to hear this as the language of our hearts, in this city, and wherever His own are found.
{20}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD - FIRST READING
@1 Chronicles 29:26-30; @2 Chronicles 1
W.J.H. I thought that we might be able to consider the preparation and construction of the temple by Solomon, as typifying the work of the Lord at the present time. It must be evident to us all that God is working. We cannot think of God as doing nothing. He has worked during these last two thousand years -- He has accomplished a great work. Creation tells us the wonders of His works. While He prepared the earth for man in six days, God has now been working for two thousand years and the work which He is in process of completing is supremely great. The temple is one of the features of His present work. The Lord is seated on a throne in glory in order to continue this work, to build the temple of God.
I thought that, if we might consider the first five chapters of the Second Book of the Chronicles, it would help us to see the materials used and the way in which they are assembled. The end of everything
{21}
is the glory that fills the house; God comes to dwell in His temple.
We form part of this temple, beloved brethren, in its local aspect, as in Corinthians, where the apostle says, "ye are the living God's temple" (@2 Corinthians 6: 16), as well as in its universal character, as in Ephesians where "all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord" (@Ephesians 2: 21). I trust that the Lord will help us to discern the part which we have in these great thoughts.
Th.D. It is striking to see that God used six days to prepare the earth for man and that two thousand years are applied to the preparation of the temple for His glory.
W.J.H. Does not that give us a sense of the greatness of the present work of God? God was able, *in six days*, to set in their places the sun, the moon and the stars, to create the trees, the plants, the animals, the fish and *man*. But for two thousand years He has been working by His Spirit on something different; this work is not yet finished; how great it must be!
M. When would you say that the preparation began? At Pentecost, I suppose.
W.J.H. It began with David, who prepared in abundance but the building,
{22}
strictly speaking, was the work of Solomon, who is Christ glorified. The Holy Spirit has been sent down here by Him to reach this end.
M. Does the preparation continue along with the construction?
W.J.H. Yes, because the building grows, as we see in the epistle to the Ephesians; we are, "built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit" (@Ephesians 2: 22). In a certain sense, it is also true that each local assembly is a temple of God, which is preceded by the work of God in the locality.
M. Preparation continues in an individual way.
W.J.H. Before arriving at Solomon, we find that the reign of David has come to an end. His kingdom is established; every enemy has been brought into subjection. David leaves the scene; Solomon takes his place. Before arriving at the thought of the construction of the temple, we must enter the kingdom -- David's kingdom. Our wills have to be made subject. I think that most of us spend all our lives at this point.
Th.D. What is the difference between David's kingdom and the kingdom of Solomon?
W.J.H. David's kingdom is to
{23}
make us subject and to break the power of enemies. The kingdom of Solomon has in view the construction of the house. It is Christ seen in a different aspect. I have the impression that most of us spend our lives in the kingdom of David. We are continually fighting enemies; our wills are not yet subject; we are not in the Lord's hands as to the thought of the temple until David's kingdom has had its effect.
P.N. Does Peter's teaching speak to us of David's kingdom, and Paul's of the kingdom of Solomon?
W.J.H. That is a very good thought. Peter is the first of the apostles. You cannot put John or Paul before Peter. The Lord chooses Peter to be the first. The ministry of Peter prepares for the construction of the house.
D.F. David might rather be a type of Christ in His sufferings, His death and His resurrection, bringing all enemies into subjection, while Solomon would rather present to us Christ in glory.
W.J.H. Exactly; but there must be a continuation in our souls in a personal way. We enter David's kingdom; we must be brought into subjection; enemies must be vanquished. Without that,
{24}
we do not know much about the temple. The ministry of the kingdom is in view of helping us in connection with this.
"And the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of Samuel the seer" -- these are the Scriptures; they instruct us regarding the kingdom of David -- "and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Gad the seer" -- that is written ministry; you do not find these books in the Scriptures; but we have ministry to help us. If we do not pay attention to the Scriptures and the ministry, we cannot understand the kingdom of David. The acts of David, first and last, are written in these books; none is missing. How great David becomes when we consider each of his acts, from his first act to his last. Thus, by means of the Scriptures and the ministry, he occupies the place in our hearts, which is suited to him; he is enthroned. All this prepares us for Solomon. If we do not read the Scriptures and the ministry, we shall not be at the height of what belongs to the kingdom, far less that of the temple.
John concludes his gospel thus -- "And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they were written one
{25}
by one, I suppose that not even the world itself would contain the books written." The purpose of much of the ministry from Pentecost to our own day has been the development of these acts, from the first to the last, in order to exalt David in our hearts, so that we should be subject to him. This prepares the ground for Solomon and allows him to begin the great edifice which God has in view.
J.M. What is the difference between the prophet and the seer?
W.J.H. There is not a great difference, since, in early days, the prophet was called "seer". The seer is one who sees -- that is the idea conveyed in the word. He sees what God is doing, which is of the greatest importance. Where there is no vision, the people perish. If we do not have brethren who see (they are not exactly prophets, but they see), the people perish. The old men dream dreams, but the young men see visions. We need both of these elements in each local meeting.
Rem. Spiritual prosperity depends on these two sides.
W.J.H. I think so. It depends on the Scriptures, that is the book of Samuel, and it depends on the book of Nathan, the prophet, and on the book of Gad, the seer. These teach us
{26}
about David and all his acts, about the acts of the true David, who was of Bethlehem until his elevation; these are the acts "first and last". To the extent that this penetrates into our hearts, we accept Him as our Lord and we are then available for Solomon, whose great work is to build the house of God.
Rem. Part of the material was gathered by David, part by Solomon.
W.J.H. "The crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty" (@Acts 1: 15); this is what the Son of David prepared. What excellent material was there, gold, silver, precious stones assembled by David. But he said to Solomon, "Thou shalt add to it". That is where we come in. The material for the temple is composed of persons. We should hold in our hearts that the building which God is constructing is wonderful. Solomon says that the house will be "great and wonderful", composed of millions of persons, each reflecting some of the immense variety of the features of Christ. The whole creation has to be involved, trees, minerals, precious stones. The whole creation is required for material.
{27}
M. Would you say that the ministry which, for us, corresponds to the kingdom of David produces material for the construction of the temple?
W.J.H. I think so. The gospel is announced to lead us into David's kingdom but then Solomon adds to that. The first verse of chapter 1 teaches us that Jehovah magnified Solomon exceedingly. It is a beautiful expression -- He "magnified" Solomon. He made Solomon greater and greater. If Solomon is not great in our hearts, we shall not be available. Wherever you find that Christ is great, you also find quickly the characteristics of the temple. It would seem to be the prime matter -- Solomon is truly great.
M. You mean that the appreciation of Christ in our hearts makes us suitable material for the construction of the temple.
W.J.H. Christ becomes greater and greater. I am sure that, in recent years, Christ has become greater in the hearts of many of the saints; it is in view of arriving at the temple.
P.R. What is the difference between the temple and the house?
W.J.H. Both suggest the same
{28}
thought -- a habitation for God. The main thought in the temple is holiness, while with the house it is dwelling; but both speak of a habitation. When I think of a brother's house, I think of the place where he lives, where I can find him, where he is known. That is not a temple. When I think of a temple, I think of glory; it is a magnificent building where holiness is always maintained.
Rem. And worship too.
P.N. Could we say that the temple has an official character and the house is where intimacy is known?
W.J.H. That is a good thought. In a certain sense, God, in the temple, is at a distance from what is outside, while in the house He is close. In the holy city, there is no temple, because God is the temple. When Solomon had the construction of the house in view, he called everyone to take part in it. It says, "And Solomon spoke to all Israel, to the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to all the princes of all Israel, the chief fathers;" "all Israel", that included children. Then "the captains of thousands and of hundreds", representing all those who have some influence; the "judges", those who
{29}
know how to judge righteously. "All the princes of all Israel"; these are all the leaders. The "chief fathers"; these are men who have children, who have affections; a father has affections. Solomon gives orders so that *all* participate. Is it thus among the brethren here? If it is our desire, we shall participate; no one is either too young or too old to take part. God is in process of building His temple. Everything else, our businesses, our houses, our health, our money, all must be subordinated to the most important thing on earth.
Th.D. There are four different groups -- the captains of thousands and of hundreds, the judges, the princes and the chief fathers.
W.J.H. These are the different leaders which you find among the saints. The captains of thousands and of hundreds relate to war; the judges have to judge righteously; the princes are those who show the way for others to follow but the fathers bring in family affections. All have their part in the work.
The position here was that God's tent of meeting was in one place and the ark in another -- "Solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high place
{30}
at Gibeon; for there was God's tent of meeting which Moses the servant of Jehovah had made in the wilderness. But the ark of God had David brought up from Kirjath-jearim to the place that David had prepared for it; for he had spread a tent for it at Jerusalem" (@2 Chronicles 1: 3, 4). This means that Christ did not have His full place. He is so humble that He is content to dwell under a tent. The temple is constructed in order to place the ark there. The temple of God has in view that Christ should have a place which is suited to Him. This gives assurance of the presence of God.
M. Why is Moses mentioned here?
W.J.H. It is an allusion to the time when Moses was with the people in the wilderness. It is wonderful that the Lord was willing to dwell under a tent. A tent is not really great enough for Jesus. He must have a house which is "great and wonderful". The Lord was content with very humble conditions, which often, perhaps, were not really worthy of Him. But we desire that He should have a "great and wonderful" house, and Solomon wishes that all should contribute to it. The fact that the Lord has consented to dwell under a tent for years does not mean that we should not give Him a better place.
{31}
According as He increases, we desire to give Him something better. It will be understood that I am not speaking of the meeting room but of the place which He has in our hearts, of an increase in substance there.
D.F. This thought has a special appeal to the heart.
W.J.H. Yes. There is a passage where David says that he had prepared materials in his affection for the house of his God. All the materials for the tabernacle were offered willingly.
Solomon knows that it is a great and glorious work and he desires wisdom. When God asks him what he would desire, he asks for wisdom to judge "this thy great people", because he has in view the participation of all in the construction of this great edifice. The people represent the material for the house of God; this is why Solomon asks for wisdom to regulate them. If you have fifty or even twenty brothers and sisters in a meeting, how will they be regulated, built up together? Solomon says, "I need wisdom". The Lord has wisdom; Solomon needed to receive it, for he was only a man, but Christ is "God's wisdom" (@1 Corinthians 1: 24). If we simply put ourselves into His hands, He will direct us
{32}
to our place. He will not put any of us into the place of another brother or sister. If we are subject to Solomon, he will put us into the place which is suited to us.
Th.D. That is very important, since nothing should be out of place in the assembly.
W.J.H. Trouble in localities comes from persons getting out of their place. It is said of the Lord, "he shall grow up from his own place" (@Zechariah 6: 12). In Judges it says, "The stars from their courses fought with Sisera" (@Judges 5: 20); "from their courses" -- that is the important place. If every brother and every sister is in their course, the path which has been divinely assigned to them, evil is overcome. It is when we get out of our place that things go badly.
Rem. It says of Gideon's soldiers that "they stood every man in his place" (@Judges 7: 21); this is how the victory is won.
W.J.H. This is what is needed in every meeting, that every brother and every sister fills the place which is suited to them, as related to others and in relation to the Lord. God put the sun at the centre of the solar system. If the planet Venus sought to take the place of
{33}
Mars, there would be disorder. What is needed in every meeting is that each brother and each sister is in their own place.
Solomon's desire was very good in God's eyes. He desired wisdom to direct so great a people, to build the temple of God. God made available to him all that he needed, wealth, goods, glory, the life of his enemies. Everything was provided to allow him to accomplish this great work.
Verse 15 shows us how the way is prepared -- "And the king made silver and gold in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars made he as the sycamores that are in the lowland for abundance." He had not begun to build, but it says that he made silver and gold as stones and cedars as sycamores. The first thing that we need in the meetings of the Haute-Loire, and everywhere else, is an abundance of silver and of gold and of cedars. When the true Solomon gains his place in our hearts, there is an abundance of silver, gold and cedars. With these materials, there will soon be a freshness in our meetings.
P.N. Could you give us some of the features of these three materials?
{34}
W.J.H. In Scripture, silver, when properly used, represents the recognition of the Lord's redemptive rights over us. It is the silver of redemption. We are not our own but we belong to Him. We need an abundance of silver. The greater Solomon is in our eyes, the more silver we have. Each brother and each sister says, therefore, 'I am not my own; I belong to Him; He has bought me at a price'. There is no beginning without silver; a large quantity of silver is required.
Then comes the gold. You cannot have this temple without gold. It represents divine love in operation among the saints. There is an abundance of gold; the saints are "united together in love" (@Colossians 2: 2). Think of gold in such quantity that it is like stones. It is not just brotherly love, but *love* towards God and towards men; first of all towards God. Solomon furnished this. God called him Jedidiah, which means Beloved of Jehovah. The greater Christ is in our eyes, the more we love God.
There is much cedar; cedars are as common as sycamores; they represent truly great persons. The cedar is the great tree of Scripture,
{35}
the king of trees. Instead of briars and thorns, which you cannot touch without being pricked, vile and despicable things introduced by sin, you have the cedars which grow up to heaven. Christians are persons who are truly great on the earth, marked by true greatness. This is what Solomon undertook in Jerusalem before beginning to build.
Th.D. What is the thought related to the horses brought from Egypt?
W.J.H. Horses are for the battle. My impression is that the silver was used to assemble an army. If there is silver, there will be horses and chariots; that is, there will be the power to face the enemy. It is when the silver disappears from a meeting that the enemy gets in, when we are not subject to the Lord. When we are subject to Him, no enemy can touch us.
Rem. It is encouraging to see that the horses, which are brought from Egypt, can have become useful to the Lord.
W.J.H. Yes. We shall come from heaven but we have come from Egypt. This first chapter prepares for the next one.
Rem. The key to the whole chapter would be the greatness of Christ in our hearts.
{36}
W.J.H. It is also the foundation of it. The first verse tells us that Jehovah magnified Solomon exceedingly. This is at the base of everything which follows; we begin there; we have been made subject to David. Then Solomon becomes greater and greater, and silver, gold and cedars appear in abundance; horses and chariots emerge to prevent the entry of enemies.
M. If anyone had refused the authority of David, he would not be any more subject to Solomon.
W.J.H. What David did was to deliver Joab and Shimei, who had not subjected themselves, into the hands of Solomon. That is very important and means that if we are not genuinely subject to David, we shall not be with Christ in Solomon's day. We must not separate these two periods; they go together in our exercises. In a certain sense, David and Solomon are on the throne together. We are subject to both.
M. It says of Hiram that he always loved David. He was thus capable of co-operation with Solomon.
W.J.H. Solomon is looking for material. He says, 'I know someone who always loved David'. Whoever loves David
{37}
can provide material. It says, "Hiram always loved David" (@1 Kings 5: 1). He had loved him during his rejection, when Absalom had usurped his place; he had loved him when he went down into the valley to meet Goliath; he had loved him on the throne; he had *always* loved him. That is the kind of man who is able to provide material. If someone loves David, he will love Solomon and he will love God.
{38}
THE PRESENT WORK OF GOD
@Romans 7:1-4; @Romans 12:1-6; @1 Corinthians 6:19,20
I am sure that we all feel that God is working. Is it possible that the Almighty would be doing nothing? It is unthinkable. If, therefore, He is working, it is of all importance that we should consider what He is undertaking.
There is nothing among material things which can be compared with God's work in creation. What could be compared with a lily? It is quite easy to make one out of paper, but what is it in comparison with the real thing? What is there to compare with a dove? Men make them in porcelain, but what are they? What can be compared with an ant? Nothing can be compared with what there is in creation. We are exhorted to consider the work of God (@Ecclesiastes 7: 13). It says, "Remember that thou magnify his work, which men celebrate" (@Job 36: 24). God desires that we should magnify the work which has been given to us to see; that does not mean that we are able to make it greater than it is, for we cannot grasp its full
{39}
richness. I do not think it possible for a scientist to understand a worm fully; this living creature, however small it might be, is greater than man's most beautiful mechanical invention. It is very easy for men to make a motor car, but no one can make a worm; it is the work of God. We have to discern the glory of His work in what is seen.
Now I wish to speak of the work of God in the spiritual realm. God made the material creation. "And the heavens and the earth ... were finished", and no one can add anything to them. God continues to work, but His present work is related to what is spiritual and invisible to the natural eye. The invisible things are eternal, while visible things are only for a time; they will disappear. The heavens and the earth will pass away; the elements will be melted by burning heat. What is spiritual will remain and it is with this that God occupies us. The Lord says, "My father worketh hitherto and I work" (@John 5: 17), but this work is spiritual. It is with this in mind that I have read these three passages of scripture. God is engaged in three great operations at the present time.
(i) He is building His assembly, "God's
{40}
house, which is the assembly of the living God" (@1 Timothy 3: 15).
(ii) He is forming the body of Christ, as He formed Eve. He formed her in the sense of building (@Genesis 2: 22).
(iii) He is building His temple. Clearly, He is doing more than this and the full outcome of His work is beyond our grasp.
I should like to speak about these three things -- the assembly of God, the body of Christ and the temple of God. This is the divine work; the Deity -- the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit -- is engaged in this great work, at present not yet complete. It is important for us to be in this environment and to have the whole of our being directed to the great divine end.
Now let us see how each of us arrives at this. How am I to be part of the temple of God? These three great thoughts are universal. The assembly of God comprises all believers from Pentecost to the rapture. All believers on the earth are members of the body of Christ. The whole church is the temple of God, as it says in @Ephesians 2: 21, "*all* the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord".
In the epistle to the Corinthians, it speaks of "the assembly of God which is in Corinth",
{41}
that is, that the people of God in one place are viewed as being His assembly. Then the apostle says to the Corinthians, "*ye* are Christ's body" (@1 Corinthians 12: 27); in this same place He has His body. Then he says of them, "ye are the temple of God" (@1 Corinthians 3: 16). Think of what there is in thousands of places and which is according to the great universal thought -- the assembly of God, the body of Christ, the temple of God! Could anything be greater than this in the locality where we live? It is worthwhile being alive to be in the assembly of God, a member of the body of Christ, part of the temple of God. How will I find my place there? It was Solomon's desire that each should be there. The children are not too young to have part there. Although He was only twelve years old, the Lord was involved very actively in what God was doing
How then can I have part in the work of God? I believe that there is a similarity in what is produced in the individual soul and what exists in the assembly. Christ "also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it" (@Ephesians 5: 25). Husbands must love their wives as Christ loved the assembly.
{42}
The day is coming when it will be said, "the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready" (@Revelation 19: 7). The assembly is to be married to Christ. How do I have part in that? It is in being myself married to Christ. The apostle makes allusion in @Romans 7 to what is produced in each heart, "to be to another". This means that Christ has a place in our hearts such that He is a husband to us. He is the object of our hearts. He is the one for whom we live.
See how this took place in the case of the woman in @John 4. How many husbands she had had! But she had none. She had no support. Then the Lord appears, the blessed Man, the "one man" of @Romans 5. He appears before her. He wins her heart. He becomes for her this one man in such a way that she goes to the men of the city, "Come, see a man" who knows everything, who knows what I have done, but I love Him and I wish that you would love Him too. Such is the greatness of His person that He can be a husband to every human heart, so that every human heart should love Him and live for Him. So this is how it begins -- every heart
{43}
learns to love Him, to be sustained by His love, by His power, realising that what the law could not do, what the world could not provide, what money could not give, what no other could, *this man* was able to do. We are married to Him in order to bear fruit for God. This is what is produced in a heart.
So there might be thirty brothers or sisters in a place; each of them loves Christ as a woman loves her husband and is conscious of being supported by Him. When people like this are together, the idea of the assembly is realised. What meetings we would have, if things were thus! The whole assembly is going to be married to Christ and every local assembly should reach this. But we begin by having at least one heart married to Christ.
In @Isaiah 4: 1 it says, "And seven women shall take hold of one man". Christ is great enough for all to be able to take hold of Him. Every human heart can find a husband in Him. There is reproach in not being married to Christ. These women in the prophecy of Isaiah say, "Take away our reproach". When such a One comes on to the scene -- the man Christ Jesus, who is Himself over
{44}
all, God blessed for ever -- then, if we are not married to Him, we are under reproach. "And seven women shall take hold of one man in that day, saying -- Our own bread will we eat, and with our own garments will we be clothed; only let us be called by thy name -- take away our reproach!" A Christian is a person called "by thy name", that is, married to Christ. It is at this point that we make contact with the assembly. It is not possible to have an assembly if there is only a single person. The idea of an assembly means necessarily that there are others but each person who is part of the assembly of God loves Christ and is married to Him. The assembly is constituted in this way with the end in view of being united to Christ. In reality, how little we contribute practically to the assembly. The Lord expects much more of us.
I move on to the thought of the body of Christ. Many members are needed to form a body. A hand is not a body; an ear is not a body. "If the whole body were an eye, where the hearing?" To have a body, you need to have many members all united
{45}
together; such is the body of Christ. The body is for the expression of Christ. This is the purpose of having a body; it is how we are represented. How would we know one another if we did not have bodies? What a man is finds expression in his body. God forms the body of Christ in which Christ is to be expressed universally, on the one hand, and locally, on the other. Think of what is in this locality, as expressing Christ Himself, the body composed of myriads of members, of whom most pass unnoticed, but all united together in view of the great function of the expression of Christ.
How can I find my place in the body of Christ? We are led there as having the Holy Spirit -- "For also in the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body" (@1 Corinthians 12: 13). But how can I function in the body? That is the question which every member must seriously ask. What the ear does is done for the body. What occupies the eye occupies the body. What the hand does is what the body does. The action of the foot is the action of the body. No member acts independently of the body. How do I function?
{46}
Well, I have a body and I must learn what I have to do with my body before being able to function practically as part of the body of Christ. In chapter 12 of the epistle to the Romans, after speaking about our bodies, the apostle begins immediately to speak of the one body -- "we, being many, are one body in Christ". His thought moves from our own individual bodies to the body of Christ. Thus, the part which I have in the body of Christ depends on my own body. From the point of view of the apostle, it is so great that he says, "I beseech you therefore, brethren". He exhorts the saints to present their bodies "a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God". It is an intelligent service, which we can carry out, but it will cost us something; a sacrifice costs something, but it is acceptable to God. Our bodies are involved. The body is the whole vessel. Some may think, perhaps, that it is enough to present their ears and to pay attention to teaching. Others present their tongue and are careful of what they say. Others again present their hands and are diligent to do nothing which dishonours the Lord. Others are attentive to their feet and do not go where the Lord is dishonoured. That is all fine,
{47}
but it says to present "*your bodies*", that is the complete vessel and each individual part of the body. The whole vessel is presented to God and God accepts it.
Think of thirty people in this locality acting like this. Would not Christ be expressed in these thirty people, whose bodies are presented to God as living sacrifices, holy and acceptable? In principle, you would have, in this place, the body of Christ in which Christ would Himself be expressed. Christ's whole body when He was here below, was for the will of God -- "Thou hast prepared me a body ... Lo, I come (in the roll of the book it is written of me) to do, O God, thy will" (@Hebrews 10: 5, 7). And at the Supper, He says, "This is my body which is given for you" (@Luke 22: 19). What are we doing with our bodies, dear brethren? Is our character according to Him? Think of the woman in @John 4. What is she going to do with her body, now that she is attached to Christ? She no longer needs her water-pot; she leaves it. She is going to carry in herself what is of God. From now on, her feet will move along a path where she will do what pleases Him; her lips will speak about Him; her body in its entirety will be here for God. Coming into the local assembly, as a person whose body
{48}
is here for God, she would bring with her wealth for the whole gathering. Many in our gatherings are there only as spectators and that is a source of suffering. In my body, there is not a single member, which does nothing; it may be that they are not all seen, but all are doing something in relation to the whole body.
Meanwhile, God is building His temple. It is to be "great and wonderful" (@2 Chronicles 2: 9), "exceeding great in fame and in beauty" (@1 Chronicles 22: 5). Men's buildings sometimes come to my attention; how little they amount to! Could a cathedral, for example, be a habitation for God? The *living* God needs a *living* house built with *living* stones. He must have a spiritual house, with features which are magnificent. Where is magnificence to be found, if not in Christ? "And in thy splendour ride prosperously" (@Psalm 45: 4). The temple of God must be splendid. How could it be otherwise? His temple at Corinth was to be splendid. Men were bringing into it what lacked splendour and the apostle felt it; he delivered someone to Satan. Ananias and Sapphira tried to bring in something which lacked splendour. Peter
{49}
says to Sapphira, "Lo, the feet of those that have buried thy husband are at the door, and they shall carry thee out" (@Acts 5: 9). It was essential that such an element of defilement should be removed. The temple of God is holy, in its local, as well as in its universal, character. It is made of that which proceeds only from Christ.
How am I part of this? I must first learn that the development of this begins with me individually. So the apostle speaks thus in @1 Corinthians 6, "Do ye not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you, which ye have of God?" If we are not in accord with this, how can we maintain practically the truth of the temple of God? It is a collective matter. God's building is not comprised of only a single stone; it is a building. How do I understand what my place is as a stone in this edifice? By learning to hold *my* body as a vessel which is holy. The Holy Spirit dwells in the body of the believer. Do we hold our bodies in this light? How can we have holiness collectively, how can we have what is magnificent if each body is not holy, if the Holy Spirit of God is
{50}
grieved in us individually, if holiness is not maintained in each individual body? Holiness is an important feature. We must worship Jehovah in holy splendour (@1 Chronicles 16: 29). According to God, what is holy is beautiful. What beauty in Christ. He the Holy One! His body was holy, "the holy thing", it says. The Holy Spirit could come upon Him; His body was the temple. "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up" (@John 2: 19). He was speaking of the temple of His body. What a sanctuary for the Holy Spirit! John says, "I beheld the Spirit descending as a dove from heaven", symbol of peace and of what pleases God, "and it abode upon Him". The Holy Spirit descended to abide in this temple, the body of Jesus. No Christian could receive the Spirit in a bodily form. We can receive a little water from the river of God so that our hearts are filled, but the whole river does not flow into the believer. The Holy Spirit, as represented by tongues of fire, can rest upon each one, but not even Peter nor John would have been able to receive all the fire. The Holy Spirit is great enough to make His dwelling in each believer. When it says that the Holy Spirit descended on Him in a bodily form, it means that the Spirit
{51}
came in His entirety; the Holy Spirit is God and He is sufficiently great to dwell in each believer.
Thirty people come together, each married to Christ, each a member of His body, each a vessel of the Holy Spirit, having judged what is unholy in his life, in his associations, in what he reads, in what he does. If things were thus, what days we would have on the earth! There is consciousness of the love of Christ for the assembly; the body of Christ comes into evidence; the features of Christ are seen in their beautiful variety; the temple of God is known, with His glory, His light and His worship. These things are the work of God and the work of God must continue. Even Balaam recognised this -- looking at Israel from the top of the rock, seeing the thoughts of God regarding them, he says, as to a day to come, "it shall be said of Jacob and Israel, What hath God wrought!" (@Numbers 23: 23). This is what is continuing, dear brethren, and one would like to arouse interest in hearts, so that each would rejoice in the part which he is to have in the assembly of God. What can be greater than the body of Christ of which Christ Himself is the head? "And he is the head of the body, the assembly" (@Colossians 1: 18). How everything of which man is head pales
{52}
when we think of that of which Christ Himself is head!
Every Christian must share in what God presents in these three aspects. He is married to Christ Himself; then *his* body is presented to God; finally, *his* body is the dwelling place of the Holy Spirit. It will be understood that this is not what is taking place when God speaks that the earth bring forth its fruits, or that the sea swarm with living creatures! It is something much greater which occupies Divine Persons -- the constitution of the assembly, the formation of the body of Christ, the construction of the temple. Such is the present work of God.
There are people who occupy themselves only with what Christ has done in the past; others think about what He will yet do -- many books are written on events still to come, on the millennium, etc. but is the Lord doing nothing now? We could not accept that the Almighty might be inactive. On the contrary, He is carrying out a great work and He says, "Remember to glorify His works, let men celebrate". We also read, "I will meditate upon thy wondrous works" (@Psalm 119: 27).
On what do we meditate, dear brethren? Does His wonderful work mean so little
{53}
to us that we do not speak about it? Think of *all* His works. What a subject of conversation! May the Lord help us to consider the work of God.
{54}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD - SECOND READING
@2 Chronicles 2:1-5
W.J.H. We noticed yesterday that the reign of David ended before Solomon began to build. David represents Christ in conflict with enemies so that they are all brought into subjection to Him. Samuel, Nathan and Gad undertook an important service in order to exalt David before our eyes. They make known his acts, first and last, relating to the times in which he lived and the influence of his reign on other nations. Then Solomon sits on the throne and makes preparation for the building of the temple. He represents Christ in glory (not on earth but in glory), making use of the materials prepared while He was here below and adding to them, as David had said to Solomon, "Thou shalt add to it". We noticed yesterday that Solomon operated so that silver and gold were as plentiful as stones, and cedars as the sycamores that are in the lowland. This was all in view of the house.
In this chapter we have the decision to build and we see the
{55}
steps taken by Solomon to give effect to this decision. He sought to interest everyone in Israel in this matter, all the men, all the women, all the children. The chief fathers, the judges, the princes, all participated in it. It would be wonderful if we were able to lead every brother and every sister to take part in this in a living way.
This morning, we come to the purpose of Solomon to build a house for the name of Jehovah. He "purposed" to do it. He is the king on the throne, having in his hands all the resources of the kingdom and he purposes to build the house.
P.G. Why does it also speak about a house for his kingdom?
W.J.H. I think that that suggests that the building of the house of Jehovah would consolidate his kingdom. This was also the case with Moses. He built the tabernacle for God, but he was also "king in Jeshurun" Who would be insubject to the one who builds the house of God?
M. We noticed yesterday that the construction of the house by Solomon had to be preceded by the kingdom of David. I wonder if it is not essential in our times that there should be a kingdom to safeguard the house.
{56}
W.J.H. The kingdom protects the house. If anyone attempts to disturb order in the house, the power of the kingdom will intervene.
Th.D. What is the difference between these two houses -- one house for the name of Jehovah and one house for the kingdom?
W.J.H. I think that they represent two distinct thoughts. One is for God and the other is the centre of Solomon's kingdom.
I should like each brother and sister to understand that Christ has purposed to build this house. He is on the throne, clothed in power and majesty, and nothing can divert Him from His purpose. This house is currently under construction and we desire to have our part in it.
Rem. The thought is that Christ is building a house for the name of Jehovah and we have our part in it as accepting the principles of the kingdom.
W.J.H. A large part of the materials was prepared under the reign of David. In a sense, David and Solomon are on the same throne; they represent kingdoms of two kinds maintained concurrently.
Rem. Both are needed to represent Christ.
W.J.H. Yes; David was not great
{57}
enough to be Solomon at the same time. In the same way, with regard to Moses and Aaron, Moses was not great enough to be both; but Christ is great enough.
Rem. The house built by Solomon was a material one but for us it is different.
W.J.H. The Lord shows, in John chapter 4, that the time has come for what is spiritual. He says, "But the hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit..." In the Scriptures, material things are figures of spiritual things and help us to understand God's thought. The types of the Old Testament are profoundly important for us and help us to understand divine thoughts. I think that the whole material universe is a language which God uses to speak to us. If He spoke the language of Deity, we would not understand.
J.P. What grace on His part, that He should have written these things for our instruction!
W.J.H. God is our great Master. Teaching requires great patience. We are like children at school; what patience a master must have! This house, which Solomon purposed to build, was for the name of Jehovah. When you enter
{58}
the house of God and you consider what is there, you learn something about the name of Jehovah. His name implies His renown, His glory. When I see Phoebe, serving the assembly, I see the evidence of the work of God. How great is the work, which transforms a daughter of Eve into a person such as Phoebe. Eve stretched out her hand to take what did not belong to her. Phoebe is ready to come to the assistance of all who find themselves in need.
The following verse shows that a large number of workers is needed. "And Solomon numbered seventy thousand men to bear burdens, and eighty thousand stone-masons in the mountain, and three thousand six hundred to superintend them".
M. In the last two verses, we learn that there were strangers living in the land of Israel.
W.J.H. We were all strangers. There are very few Jews in the assembly in our times. Most of the work has been done by Gentiles.
M. The number is exact, not approximate.
W.J.H. As to ourselves, we should all be included in it. There is so much to be done that all are necessary.
{59}
There is much to be done in order that features of the temple might appear in this town; there are burdens to carry, there is wood to be found on the mountain, stone to hew and, over all this, there is the service of the superintendents. All this requires energy.
Th.D. What is to be understood by stone-masons?
W.J.H. I think that it indicates the provision of what is lasting. Stone is a durable material. Our businesses, our houses, our farms will come to an end. We cannot be careless as to these things, but they are not going to remain. Stone is durable. Simon will not endure but Peter will remain. Much work is needed to transform Simon into Peter.
M. Does that relate to the service of the evangelist?
W.J.H. The service of the evangelist is part of it, seeking out material.
P.N. A complementary thought is introduced in the burden-bearers.
W.J.H. It is not a matter of preaching simply to save from hell. Material is required for the house of God; this is what is in view in the preaching of the
{60}
gospel. It implies burdens because care is needed for the material which is acquired.
Rem. Living stones are needed for the building.
W.J.H. There are also three thousand six hundred overseers. If we do not have overseers who examine the kind of material which is brought, we shall not have the features of the temple in a gathering. Overseers are not liked in the world today.
Th.D. The "overseer of your souls", says the apostle Peter.
W.J.H. We must accept that overseers examine what we do. It concerns the house of God and what is unsuitable cannot be brought into it.
P.G. To return to the burden bearers, would there be an allusion to them in the verse, "But we ought, we that are strong, to bear the infirmities of the weak"? (@Romans 15: 1).
W.J.H. I think that here it is burdens related to this great work. The apostle speaks of the "burden of all the assemblies". There will not be progress in this town if there are not bearers of burdens.
D.F. The word burden bearer conveys the idea that there is something heavy to carry.
W.J.H. In principle, most of
{61}
us have to carry burdens. There are many burden bearers, almost as many as there are stone-masons. How wonderful if there were forty brothers and sisters here carrying on their hearts, night and day, the burdens of the work of God!
Th.D. There are fewer overseers. How are they to be recognised in the assembly?
W.J.H. By the features indicated in the epistle to Timothy.
P.N. Should "the issue of their conversation", which is spoken about in the epistle to the Hebrews (@Hebrews 13: 7) enlighten us?
W.J.H. Certainly. They are models. There can be no prosperity in a meeting without oversight. We should all accept this; we need it.
P.N. Does not this passage teach us that we must be subject to our overseers so that the work is prospered?
W.J.H. Surely. There must likewise be an architect for the construction. What would become of us without oversight? Even a man like Philip was about to introduce Simon the magician. Peter, a great overseer, looks at him and says that he is a man of perdition; he does not belong to the house
{62}
of God. This is what is found in Christendom; elements of perdition exist in the professing church as a consequence of lack of oversight.
M. We must remember that it is Christ who is building. There are many overseers but Christ, the Son, is the builder.
W.J.H. If the overseers do not measure up, the Lord will take matters into His own hands.
Rem. It is important that the young accept submission to the overseers.
W.J.H. Peter says, "Likewise ye younger, be subject to the elder" (@1 Peter 5: 5). The word 'elder' does not mean simply that they are old; they are those who are vigilant for the interests of God in the assembly. An old brother does not have to say to the young, "You have to be subject to me because I am old", but if there are with him features of an elder, it is right to be subject to him.
Ques. What would be the features of an elder?
W.J.H. First of all, he is self-judged; he has learned self-control; his mind is under control; he does not lose his temper in a difficult situation. He has white garments; his affairs can stand examination; they are regulated; everything in his house is in order. He has a golden harp; he is able
{63}
to sing God's praises. Then he has a cup of gold, full of fragrances; you hear him at the prayer meeting. If Christ is presented to his heart, he throws his crown before the throne. Such is an elder. The twenty-four elders described in @Revelation 5 are models for all elders. We must submit ourselves to such men.
Rem. The elders and the overseers are the same persons.
Rem. The apostle Paul speaks of the elders of Ephesus as being overseers of the assembly.
W.J.H. It is the same thought.
Ques. Do we find the burden bearers, the stone-masons and the overseers in those who persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers, at the beginning of the Acts?
W.J.H. I think so. They are all there. The temple was truly founded at that point.
As to oversight, I do not think that any brother could exercise it unless he had a golden harp or a cup full of fragrance. If a brother never takes part in the meeting for prayer and never gives thanks at the breaking of bread, how can he take part in the care meeting?
{64}
L.D. You think that it is good to have special meetings for oversight.
W.J.H. It is *essential*. If we do not have these three thousand six hundred superintendents, things will not prosper. The Lord is helping the brethren to see the importance and the dignity of the care meeting. It is one of the most important meetings.
P.N. Do we have the thought of administration in the number three thousand six hundred -- three times twelve hundred?
W.J.H. I had not thought of that; I think it is right. We have the same idea in the twenty-four elders -- two times twelve.
Th.D. Twelve is the perfect number in connection with administration.
W.J.H. Twelve and all multiples of twelve are related to administration. We now come to verses 3 and those following. On his accession to the throne, he is going to employ men to prepare materials; he does not search for them himself. We thus have our part in this work; we are men, not angels. It does not appear that angels had any part in the construction of the temple. Every Hiram, that is, whoever has always been a lover of David, can contribute to the provision of materials.
{65}
L.D. At the end of the epistle to the Ephesians, the apostle Paul addresses a greeting to all those who love the Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption.
W.J.H. That is a very good remark, since this epistle speaks of the temple in its universal aspect. "...all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord" (@Ephesians 2: 21). It is composed of those who love Christ in incorruption. In the epistle to the Corinthians, we find the other side; it is a matter of the temple seen in the local assembly. The apostle says, "If anyone love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha" (@1 Corinthians 16: 22). Such a person has no part in the building; he will be under curse at the coming of the Lord. I think that these two passages help us greatly to see where the materials come from. Hiram is the king of Tyre; he has his place in this world but he loves David. You do not find him in a monastery or in a convent. He represents a man in his shop, on his farm, but he loves David. He is someone who is going to bring material.
Th.D. "As thou didst deal with David my father ... so do for me". We must not stop at David.
W.J.H. That is very good. A lover of
{66}
David also loves Solomon. If we love Christ down here, in conflict and on the cross, we shall love Him on the throne. We think much about what the Lord did down here but is He not doing anything now? So Hiram rejoiced on learning that Solomon proposed to build the house of God and he is moved to worship; may we do the same! The Lord is building the house of God and worship is the appropriate response on our part as we think of such a work.
In the Scriptures, trees and wood, as things that grow on the earth, represent men. Stone is the work of God. No one ever made a stone. Stone represents what we are as the result of the work of God. They are two different ways of considering the saints.
P.N. What is the thought in the wood being brought by water?
W.J.H. As here below, we learn to accept death. To be available, we have to accept the principle of death.
L.D. That is the reality of baptism for us.
W.J.H. I think so. It is the acceptance of death down here. It is not that the tree actually dies but it is the acceptance of the principle of death.
{67}
Th.D. Paul says, "But we have this treasure in earthen vessels" (@2 Corinthians 4: 7). Does wood represent earthen vessels?
W.J.H. I think that is right. It says, "...always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body" (@2 Corinthians 4: 10). It is still Paul but he has accepted death and the life of Jesus is thus manifested in him.
Th.D. These trees grew on Lebanon; then they were cut down and brought to Solomon.
W.J.H. The true position of the saints is to be growing on Lebanon, close to heaven. What characterises man naturally is covetousness and selfishness. But love for David will transform us in such a way that even the things which occupy us will produce material for the house of God. We have to toil, working what is honest with our hands, that we may have to distribute to those who have need. The house of God is composed of such persons.
I. What would you say about the queen of Sheba's journey?
W.J.H. She had heard of Solomon, of his wisdom and of the house which he had built. She came from the ends of the earth to see it and, when she saw it, there was no
{68}
more spirit in her. It is what would happen if someone were to come among the saints and see the work of God. Solomon makes his thought known to us -- "Behold, I build a house unto the name of Jehovah my God to dedicate it to him, to burn before him sweet incense, and for the continual arrangement of the shewbread, and for the morning and evening burnt offerings and on the sabbaths and on the new moons, and on the set feasts of Jehovah our God. This is an ordinance for ever to Israel." (verse 4). It is wonderful, a house built for this purpose, dedicated to Jehovah. If this had been maintained, there would not be all the confusion which exists presently in Christendom. A house dedicated to Jehovah is not for the glory of man; it is for God, to "burn before him sweet incense", a house of prayer.
D.F. These features should be evident among the saints.
W.J.H. It is a matter of the service of the house of God; this service is for God. It is not to give prominence to a brother or a sister.
L.D. For whom are the shewbread?
W.J.H. Solomon wanted a house
{69}
where the twelve loaves were continually before God. They represent the people according to God's thought. "...we, being many, are one loaf, one body;" (@1 Corinthians 10: 17).
M. Why this order -- the incense, the shewbread, the burnt offerings.
W.J.H. The incense is specially for God. We can have our part in the other things but not in the incense. "Let my prayer be set before thee as incense," (@Psalm 141: 2); it is for God. Not all prayer is incense. The prayer of the wicked is not incense; it is an abomination. I do not think that prayers which focus on ourselves have much incense character. Consider, for example, the prayer of Jacob -- "If God will be with *me*, and keep *me* on this road that *I* go, and will give *me* bread to eat, and a garment to put on, and *I* come again to *my* father's house in peace -- then shall Jehovah be *my* God." (@Genesis 28: 20, 21). I doubt that there is much incense there. This is incense -- "Our Father who art in the heavens, let *thy* name be sanctified, let *thy* kingdom come, let *thy* will be done as in heaven so upon the earth;" (@Matthew 6: 9, 10). The house of God is for incense; it is one
{70}
of the objectives in view in the building of the temple.
In the Acts, the temple was characterised by prayer right from the beginning. The disciples were gathered but they did not pray for bread. They "gave themselves ... to continual prayer" with Mary and several women. The Spirit of God descends and establishes the temple in this atmosphere. We have to pray about our food, but this precedes it -- "let thy name be sanctified, let thy kingdom come"! Then we can continue -- "give us today our needed bread" Thus there will be incense in individual prayer at home.
We must not think that we form part of the temple only when we are in a meeting room. We truly belong to the temple -- "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God ... ?" (@1 Corinthians 3: 16). It was not simply when they were assembled; they were always the temple of God.
Rem. In the first epistle to Timothy, where there is reference to the house of God, the first exhortation is to prayer.
W.J.H. "I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men;" (@1 Timothy 2: 1).
{71}
Rem. It seems to me that that would show the importance of prayer, whether in our houses or when we are gathered.
Ques. Does the incense refer exclusively to collective prayer?
W.J.H. Normally, there is much more power in prayer when we are gathered, but I should not like to exclude the thought of incense from individual prayer. "Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense".
D.F. It says, "...that the men pray in every place".
W.J.H. Yes, and Malachi says, "...in every place incense shall be offered unto my name," (@Malachi 1: 11). How blessed that is! In every town, in every village, incense will arise to God. It is what already obtains in local assemblies and in our houses as contributing to the assembly.
Rem. It is still true that the service of God is "neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem", but where the features of the temple exist substantially.
Rem. In connection with the thought of a "house of prayer", I think that collective prayer is of special importance.
W.J.H. It is very important. The work of God in Europe began in
{72}
relation to prayer. It was the custom of the women to pray by the river. Paul, Silas, Timothy and Luke joined them. It says, "...as *we* were going to prayer..." (@Acts 16: 16).
L.D. What is suggested by the fact that it was women who were assembled?
W.J.H. I think that they loved David. They were married, so as to speak, to David, but they had not yet reached the truth of the assembly and Paul comes to give them the light of Solomon.
Th.D. You said that we have the truth of the unity of the assembly in the bread, "*one loaf*", according to what it says, "...we, being many, are one loaf, one body". When we break bread, we have in view the whole assembly.
W.J.H. That is maintained on the table, so as to speak. It is the shewbread, one body. In certain sects, the bread is in many pieces.
Th.D. That exposes a sectarian state.
W.J.H. The "one loaf" does not suggest a sectarian state. It corresponds to the twelve shew-loaves. The apostle says, "The bread which *we* break", not which *you* break. It is true wherever the saints are. Paul is at Rome and they are at Corinth,
{73}
but it is, however, the bread which *we* break.
Finally, this morning, we can consider further what relates to "morning and evening burnt offerings and on the sabbaths and on the new moons, and on the set feasts of Jehovah our God". The house of God was to be for incense, for the shewbread and for sacrifices.
The sacrifices are wonderful. They must continue for as long as the house of God is down here. The morning and evening burnt offerings, the feasts of sabbath and new moons, the set feasts, all these things express in their various forms our appreciation of Christ.
J.M. Would you say something about the morning and evening burnt offerings?
W.J.H. I am sure that you have some appreciation of Christ as He who comes in the morning, an appreciation of Him at Bethlehem, in the morning of His life. Then there is the evening, the darkness of Gethsemane and Calvary. Every believer has some impression in his soul of the morning and the evening, and all rises towards God in the temple.
D.F. An appreciation of His incoming, of His life and of His death.
{74}
W.J.H. The evening is the same as the morning, a lamb equally pure, equally gentle, equally humble in the evening as it was in the morning. He is the lamb without blemish at the end of the day as He was at the beginning. He is as gentle, as accessible in the evening as in the morning. We have learnt to love Him and sacrifices are brought to the house of God. It is to this end that Solomon built it.
There is also the feast of the sabbath which must continue. This means that, in God's house. God is worshipped in relation to Christ, Him in whom He finds rest. "The sabbath of Jehovah" is not Saturday, it is Jesus.
The new moons are wonderful moments. "The new moons", not the new moon, speak of the new light which comes from Christ after each period of darkness. The moons reappear continually. There are periods without the moon, then the moon appears again. In the Lord's life, there was darkness on man's side, but the light shone in the darkness. The last century has been one of new moons and the service of God is to continue in relation to this.
{75}
TO HEAR THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON
@2 Chronicles 9:1,2; @Revelation 11:1
I should like to remind the brethren of the words of the Lord as to this incident. He says that the queen of Sheba "came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon" and He adds, "and behold, more than Solomon is here" (@Matthew 12: 42). The Lord Jesus is more than Solomon -- He is all that Solomon was but He is more. He is "God's wisdom", as the apostle says, "...Christ God's power and God's wisdom" (@1 Corinthians 1: 24). It may be that someone has come here, like the queen of Sheba, from the ends of the earth, whose heart may be at a great distance from the divine centre, which is Christ. Christ is the centre of God's universe, according to what He said Himself, "...I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me" (@John 12: 32). He must be the centre of attraction around which moves everything which is of God.
The queen of Sheba came to Solomon with her enigmas. There are probably some here who have enigmas. At the present time there are great enigmas
{76}
in the world and, in the human heart, what serious questions are raised! What are we to do about our sins? There is an enigma! What shall we do when the Jordan overflows its banks? What shall we do when the flood-tides of death rise? "...how wilt thou then do in the swelling of the Jordan?" (@Jeremiah 12: 5). That is another enigma. The queen of Sheba came to Solomon with all her enigmas and he answered them all. There was not a single question which he did not answer. Christ can answer all your heart's questions. He can settle the question of your sins. He can tell you how to cross the Jordan. He can tell you what will happen after death. He can tell you what there is in heaven.
I wonder if all who are here have come to Jesus suitably. The queen of Sheba came with spices, with sincere desires, with genuine prayers. She came with her gold, that is, with love in her heart; she did not hate Solomon. Why would anyone hate Jesus? Of some, alas, it says, "They hated me without a cause" (@John 15: 25). There is no cause to hate Jesus; there are many causes to love Him. The queen came with her spices, with her gold and with her enigmas. She found someone who was
{77}
able to answer all the desires of her heart.
Now, what did she see when she came? She saw what anyone with right desires can see, what we can see in the very locality where we live, where Christ is honoured, where the temple of God is found. It says that she *saw* "the wisdom of Solomon". Where did she see this wisdom? It does not say that she heard it but she saw it, in the servants, in those who loved him, in the house which he had built, in the ascent which he had made, in the food which he provided, in the apparel of his servants. It says of Solomon that God gave him "wisdom and very great understanding and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea-shore" (@1 Kings 4: 29). Think of a heart like that, as broad as the sand that is on the sea-shore, a heart that can think of all the people of God, right up to the present day!
It says that Solomon spoke of the trees, "from the cedar-tree that is on Lebanon even to the hyssop that springs out of the wall" (@1 Kings 4: 33). I have no doubt the queen of Sheba heard about all these things. The cedar is the king of trees; it is Christ in His royal glory as Man. The hyssop is Christ in his humility, ready
{78}
to take the smallest opportunity to do as the hyssop, which springs out of a crack in the rock. We can think about the Lord in this way, as He appears in @John 4, ready to take His place in the heart of the woman of Samaria. He was sufficiently lowly also to enter the heart of the dying thief. This is the hyssop. But there was also the cedar. The thief saw in Him the King; he says, "thy kingdom". That is the cedar.
Solomon spoke about animals. He spoke about the lion, "mighty among beasts, which turneth not away for any" (@Proverbs 30: 30). Such is Christ; He never turns away. He also spoke about the lamb, which is so humble, accessible, lovable. What little boy or girl does not love a lamb? Everyone loves it; it reminds us of Jesus.
Solomon spoke about birds. He spoke of the powerful eagle, whose wings allow it to rise. The Lord could ascend into heaven. Solomon was also able to speak about the sparrow. "I watch, and am like a sparrow alone upon the housetop" (@Psalm 102: 7). No one wants to have a sparrow; it is not sought after; it is outside the life of man, solitary upon a housetop. Such was Jesus.
{79}
Solomon spoke about fish. They all serve the Lord. If He needs a great fish for His service, He can create it. He can prepare it (@Jonah 2: 1). And if He needs one with a stater in its mouth, He can procure it, since all the fish are His (@Matthew 17: 27). He controls the seas.
He also speaks of the reptiles, of the creeping things. Among the animals, he must also have spoken about the badger. Remember that badger skins were used in the tabernacle. A badger is an animal which is difficult to catch. No one was able to lay hands on Jesus until it was allowed (@John 7: 44). He was humble, out of sight in this world, and no one could take Him until the time for that arrived. He also spoke of the ant, of all the wisdom found in it. He said, "Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways and be wise (@Proverbs 6: 6). It can also be seen as referring to Jesus, from another point of view -- we are called to go to Him and consider His ways. The Scriptures also speak of the worm -- "I am a worm", said the Lord, "and no man" (@Psalm 22: 6).
We can thus take account of what was
{80}
presented by Solomon in his wisdom. We can understand how the queen of Sheba must have been struck. There was no spirit left in her. She saw "the house which he had built". I wonder if you have seen this house. The apostle says -- "whose house are *we*" (@Hebrews 3: 6). The house built by Christ is not made of bricks and stones. It is a spiritual house composed of all those who love Christ, of all those who have received the Holy Spirit. It is the most magnificent edifice in the universe, a "great and wonderful" house. The queen of Sheba saw it in figure.
She saw "the food of his table". She had never seen such food. Cucumbers, melons, leeks, onions and garlic may be found in the land of Sheba or in the land of Egypt, but the food of Solomon's table is not there. The apostle says, "Ye cannot partake of the Lord's table, and of the table of demons" (@1 Corinthians 10: 21). The Lord has a table. What is there on this table? A wonderful feast -- "Take, eat" (@Matthew 26: 26). "This is my body which is given for you" (@Luke 22: 19); His precious body delivered up to death in love for us. Then there is
{81}
the cup -- "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you" (@Luke 22: 20); "Drink ye all of it" (@Matthew 26: 27). That is what there is on His table. She had never seen food like that. I wonder if we are all partaking of it. Some have fallen so low that they think that it is not necessary for them. It is the food of Solomon's table, the best food in the universe. It gives a constitution that allows entrance into eternity. The material food which we take will perish (@John 6: 27) but the strength which we derive from the Lord at the Supper fortifies us to enter eternity, to rise up to heaven. In Matthew and Mark, it says that, after the supper, "having sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of Olives". How can we move up the holy mount, rise into the spiritual sphere? By the strength provided by "the food of his table".
She saw "the deportment of his servants". She was profoundly struck by the deportment of Solomon's servants. Neither the servants of the land of Sheba, nor those of the land of Egypt, stood as those did. How did the servants of Solomon stand? The Lord tells us of
{82}
their deportment when He asks the question, "For which is greater, he that is at table or he that serves? Is it not he that is at table? (@Luke 22: 27). Servants in this world do not act in this way. They are concerned with wearing uniforms, decorations and ecclesiastical vestment but it is not thus with the servants of Solomon. They act like Christ; they are of His spirit.
She saw "the order of service of his attendants". There was no confusion in the service; everything was orderly; every attendant was in his place. The priests were in their place, the captains were in their place, those who supervised the provision of food were in their place. All the servants fulfilled their duty, according to the words of the Lord; "...to each one his work" (@Mark 13: 34). Every Christian has his task. There is no confusion. No one is out of his place in Solomon's kingdom.
She saw "their apparel". As she looked around, she noticed how his attendants were dressed. What a joy to look around and see how Christians are dressed, especially in our days. They are not dressed like the world. Sisters do not have their hair
{83}
cut and neither their faces nor their nails are painted. They are dressed in the same way as the true servants of Solomon. How are they dressed? It says, "Let thy garments be always white" (@Ecclesiastes 9: 8). The servants of Solomon are always in white, that is, pure. In their relations, whether between husband and wife, between parents and children, in business, among the saints, at all times their garments are white. That is how the servants of Solomon are dressed.
She saw "his cupbearers and their apparel". What a wonderful service to be a cupbearer! Are we His cupbearers? Do we provide refreshment for the true Solomon? Do we make His heart happy, that heart which has been broken by grief? "Reproach hath broken my heart". He says (@Psalm 69: 20). He was "despised and left alone of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief" (@Isaiah 53: 3). He now has millions of cupbearers who bring to Him that which rejoices His heart. We can well recall what the servant of Joseph said, speaking of his master's silver cup -- "Is not this it in which my lord drinks, and in which indeed he divines?" (@Genesis 44: 5),
{84}
'You have stolen the cup of my lord.' Have we stolen Joseph's silver cup? Perhaps you reply, "But it is Joseph's servant who had put it in my sack." What he did was what they themselves had done. These ten brethren had stolen Joseph's portion; they had stolen from him what belonged to him. Their sheaves should have bowed to him; the stars ought to have bowed down before him. It was his cup, what God had in view for him and his brethren had taken it from him. That is why he raised the question, "Where is my silver cup?" They bring it back to him, recognising his lordship. They fall down before him -- "...we are my lord's bondmen," they say. Do we bring the silver cup to Him? Are we His cupbearers? Is He our Lord, our only Lord? Other Lords have had dominion over us but Jude says that He is "our only Master and Lord Jesus Christ". These cupbearers are all clothed in white. They do not say, "Lord, Lord", without that having meaning. They obey Him; they confess with the mouth Jesus as Lord.
She saw "his ascent by which he went up to the house of Jehovah". This is perhaps what is more elevated. You can
{85}
imagine how the queen's gaze was fixed on this ascent, considering the way by which this wonderful king moved up towards God. The way in which David descended is spoken of. Eliab said, "Why art thou come down?" (@1 Samuel 17: 28). He came down into the valley. What a descent was that of Jesus. "He that descended is the same who has also ascended" (@Ephesians 4: 10). First of all He descended, like David. He descended to the field of battle, where the giant was, where death was, where man could do nothing, where every heart was full of fear. God has been "manifested in flesh". He came down as man to the earth to meet the enemy, to annul him who had the power of death, to take Goliath's sword and use it Himself. Death is now in the hands of Jesus. He has descended in order that every heart should love Him. When David went up from the valley, the women bore testimony to the affections of the people as they sang his praises -- "Saul has smitten his thousands, and David his ten thousands" (@1 Samuel 18: 7). The soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David and he loved him "as his own soul". Hiram was ever a lover of David. Who does not love David?
{86}
Who does not love Him who has descended from heaven, who has descended into the valley, who has descended as far as death, who has descended to vanquish the power of death? The Lord has triumphed gloriously. The queen of Sheba saw his upward movement; she saw the ascent by which he went up to God. What wonderful steps, those by which he went up! The Lord Jesus ascended up to heaven in steps. The first step was when He came out of the sepulchre. Standing beside the sepulchre, He says, "Mary". He is no longer in death. The angel says, "He is not here, for he is risen, as he said, Come, see the place where the Lord lay." (@Matthew 28: 6) but He is no longer there. The Lord Jesus has risen from the dead. What a wonderful step! Then Luke says that He was "carried up into heaven"; Mark, that He was "taken up into heaven". In John, He says, "I ascend"; He ascends by His own right. Peter says, in the book of Acts, that heaven must receive Him (@Acts 3: 21). To be able to be in Solomon's courts, you must receive Him. It was no matter for Him of forcing His way -- heaven received Him. Paul says that He "has been received up in glory" (@1 Timothy 3: 16). He has ascended "up above all the heavens" and not simply into heaven. The resurrection
{87}
is one step, then the heavens are each one further step. The first heaven is a step, the second heaven is another, the third heaven is another one still. Paul went up to the third heaven, up to where the Lord ascended -- to paradise. "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise" the Lord said to the malefactor; paradise is the third heaven. But the Lord went even higher than that. In type, the queen of Sheba considers the ascension. She sees Him ascend as far as the presence of God, beyond the creation. He created the heavens and the earth, and He is Himself above the heavens. He "humbleth himself to look on the heavens" (@Psalm 113: 6). "He will call to the heavens from above" (@Psalm 50: 4). Jesus has gone there, "up above all the heavens", seeing which, in type, the queen of Sheba becomes a worshipper.
"There was no more spirit in her". There was a reply to her enigmas -- her soul was filled with the glory of Solomon, with the greatness of the house which he had built, with the food of his table, with the deportment of his servants, with the order of service of his attendants and their apparel, with his cupbearers and their apparel, as also with the ascent by which he went up to the house of God. She becomes a worshipper.
{88}
"The Father seeks such as his worshippers". It was for this reason that the Lord had come to the well at Sychar. He had come there to meet another human heart to which He desired to bring the knowledge of God. "If thou knewest the gift of God", He said to her, "and who it is who says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". Who is this who has approached men in this way? If the woman had known, she would have asked of Him and He would have given her "living water". So the Lord says, "God is a spirit, and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth." All true worship is in the light of the glory of Christ. This is what the queen of Sheba reached in figure.
"And she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and spices in very great abundance, and precious stones; neither was there any such spice as that which the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon ... And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatever she asked, besides what she had brought to the king. And she turned and went to her own land, she and her servants." The queen of Sheba now appears as a giver. What can we give to the Lord? "The earth is Jehovah's, and the fulness thereof" (@Psalm 24: 1).
{89}
The silver and the gold are His. "The cattle upon a thousand hills" are His (@Psalm 50: 10). What would we be able to give Him? It says, "My son give me thy heart" (@Proverbs 23: 26); it is all that we can give Him. This is what the gold and the spices mean, the beauty and the fragrance of a heart which loves Solomon. The queen of Sheba had given him that and he had given her all her desire. But what would she desire? She could not desire the pleasures of the world after having seen Solomon. What could she desire? something which would speak to her of Solomon. The Lord will always grant to a heart all that it desires. The Lord said to the woman in chapter 4 of John, "Every one who drinks of this water shall thirst again; but whosoever drinks of the water which I shall give him shall never thirst for ever, but the water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life." Certainly, the greatest gift which God could give us is the Holy Spirit -- "how much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him" (@Luke 11: 13). Solomon gave her all her desire and returned to her what she had brought. If one brings something to Christ, He receives it and He returns more than what was brought.
{90}
The first verse of chapter 11 of the Revelation is a verse of which very sober account must be taken. John receives a measuring reed. "Rise", he is told "and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship in it".
"Measure the temple". Does it attain to the divine measures? If you were to set the divine measures alongside the cathedrals of men, would they reach the divine length? In the temple of God, "doth every one say, Glory!" (@Psalm 29: 9). In the temple of God, everything speaks of His glory and of the glory of Christ, for the temple was built to house the ark. The ark is Jesus -- small externally, but so great internally. The house was built for the ark. If I go into the temple of God, I notice that the occupation of all there is God and Christ and everything that relates to the divine glory. There is no place for anything else. "In his temple doth every one say, Glory!" Is there something here for the glory of God, for the glory of Jesus? It says, measure it. Let us measure it, dear brethren, so that we take account of whether that with which we are linked corresponds to the divine measure.
"Measure ... the altar". The altar is the means of access to God. It is on the altar that sacrifices are set. What would happen if
{91}
all the altars in Christendom were measured? They would not answer to the divine measures. The epistle to the Hebrews speaks of the altar -- "...he is able to save completely those who approach by him to God" (@Hebrews 7: 25). No one can approach God other than by Jesus. He is the altar. The altar is greater than the sacrifice. It is the altar, which sanctifies the sacrifice. Where is there an altar like this? Only in Jesus. "By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise continually to God, that is, the fruit of the lips confessing his name" (@Hebrews 13: 15). Do we have this altar?
"Measure ... them that worship in it" -- measure the worshippers. Christendom measures the worship but God measures the worshippers. In the world, it is thought that, if there is beautiful music, a fine building, a sophisticated service, it is pleasurable to God. But God says, 'Measure the worshippers; measure the persons'. What are they? That is the important thing. The Lord says, "the Father seeks *such*". He does not seek organs, vestments or breviaries; no, He is looking for persons, hearts who love Him and who love Christ. Measure them, He says. When the Lord measures us, what does He find? Do we answer to the divine requirements?
May the Lord give us to discern
{92}
this wonderful scene, so that we may become worshippers, worshippers of God and worshippers of Jesus, for the love of His name.
{93}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD - THIRD READING
@2 Chronicles 2:6,7
W.J.H. We have considered the preparation for the construction of the temple of God, which is the great work in which divine Persons are engaged at the present moment. I think we could say that it is a greater work than that of the physical creation, because the physical creation will be dissolved, while what God is doing now remains eternally.
Now, at the point which we have reached this morning, Solomon raises a very important question -- "Who is able to build Him a house, seeing the heavens and the heaven of heavens cannot contain him?" Nothing of what is created, not even new creation, could contain God in His absolute character. Solomon had a great conception of the glory of God. He says, "Behold, the heavens and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee" (@2 Chronicles 6: 18).
Th.D. What do we understand by "the heaven of heavens"?
W.J.H. It is the highest point in creation. I have no doubt that there is
{94}
allusion to the third heaven. It is created, but a spiritual realm, which is not made of physical material. When the apostle went to the third heaven (@2 Corinthians 12: 2), he did not know where his body was. But this is a created domain, and God cannot be limited to that. It is wonderful to see that Paul was unable to speak about it when he came back down. There is no language known which would enable us to speak about it, it is so great. But God is even greater.
Ques. Can we go higher than this sphere?
W.J.H. No, no creature can, but God can. As we noticed yesterday, "Who humbleth himself to look on the heavens" (@Psalm 113: 6); it is a notable verse in the book of Psalms. I do not know of another which gives a more profound impression of the greatness of God. "Who humbleth himself to look on the heavens" -- He condescends to look upon them. Solomon is conscious of this; he says, "And who am I that I should build him a house?"
M. I wonder whether Solomon raises this question to show that there is only one person capable of building the house of Jehovah. Is not that the thought in @Revelation 5, where only
{95}
one is found worthy to open the book?
W.J.H. It is a very similar thought. Christ alone is able to build the house; Christ alone can open the book. I feel that the Lord has helped us in these recent times to see that God cannot be limited to what is created. He whom no eye has seen or is able to see, He is invisible; He is always invisible. In the incarnation, God has made known all that we can know, all that the creature is able to know, whether angels or men. But there is more than that; there must be more, otherwise He would not be God. What we are saying applies to the Person of Jesus, who is God -- "...no one knows who the Son is" (@Luke 10: 22). Beyond what is known lies the inscrutable. That does not stop Solomon; he builds the house. What has been presented recently as to the Lord's sonship establishes what is inscrutable in God. Solomon tells again of the purpose of his house. It could not contain God. "And who am I that I should build him a house, except to burn sacrifice before him?" The house is the place to which sacrifices are brought and presented to God. A great number of sacrifices are there.
{96}
M. The expression used here relates to sacrifices and incense.
W.J.H. There is great variety in the offerings. The Scriptures speak of "the sacrifice of praise", "a sacrifice of thanksgiving", of the sweet odour of prayers, of communicating of our substance "for with such sacrifices God is well pleased". The apostle said to the Philippians that what they had given him was "an odour of sweet savour, an acceptable sacrifice, agreeable to God". The house of God is where all these sacrifices are received.
M. It seems that Solomon did not have sacrifice for sin in view; in relation to the construction of the temple, he sees it as something already accomplished.
W.J.H. That is what the epistle to the Hebrews says (@Hebrews 9: 26) -- "But now once in the consummation of the ages he has been manifested for the putting away of sin by his sacrifice". It is done; obviously, it is not forgotten, but it is finished.
In verse 7, Solomon needs a man. The Lord desires to engage men in this great work; we must all apply ourselves to this. The work is done by Solomon but he uses various instruments. It is really the Lord who is building the temple but He is, at present, not personally down here
{97}
on earth involved in the construction, thus He needs men. This is the purpose of meetings like this; it is a matter of men making progress. When I say men, I am speaking of men and women. These are men in contrast to angels.
P.G. Why is the plural not used? It says, "And now send me a man".
W.J.H. I think that he is an example of the kind of man that is needed. Paul is the man needed for the construction; he is the "wise architect". He needed others to copy him. He says in the epistle to the Corinthians that we must all see how we build and that what we build will be tried by fire. But as architect, Paul is the great builder. I think that he is the one who illustrates this section distinctively.
Th.D. Hiram's servants worked with the skilful men who were already with Solomon.
D.F. Paul was the apostle of the gentiles, while Peter, James and John represented rather the work among the Jews.
W.J.H. Exactly. Clearly, the construction has no national character.
{98}
There is no idea in the Scriptures, for example, of a Church of England. There are churches *in* England, *in* France, *in* Germany but, in a scriptural sense, there is no Church *of* England, *of* France, or *of* Germany. Nationality does not enter into the temple of God. Paul was particularly chosen and delivered from all nationality, even more than Peter.
M. Hiram was the son of a man of Tyre and a woman of the daughters of Daniel
W.J.H. He was delivered from what is national, belonging at the same time to Tyre and to Daniel He would have had as much interest in the one as the other.
Rem. The Scriptures consider only the church in its universal aspect and as local churches. There is nothing else.
W.J.H. A national church is a denial of Christianity. A local assembly is according to the model of the whole; otherwise, it is not according to God. The assemblies of Judea and the assembly at Corinth must have been the same in character. If we are subject to the truth, in England, in Australia, in France, the assemblies everywhere will have the same character. What we have to beware of in each locality is what is peculiar to the place. The apostle reminds
{99}
Titus (@Titus 1: 12) that "Cretans are always liars, evil wild beasts, lazy gluttons ... for which cause rebuke them severely". They are put on their guard against what is native to that place. We must be equally vigilant in order to take on the character of the temple of God.
Th.D. We must beware of what is natural and also of local and national customs.
W.J.H. We must have assembly customs. We must have the Lord's customs. The Scriptures speak of His custom. The custom which we must have in all local meetings is the Lord's custom. The apostle says in @1 Corinthians 11, "... *we* have no such custom, nor the assemblies of God."
Th.D. There is danger of having particular customs, which are not those of the assemblies of God.
W.J.H. We must judge them, because they are not of God. We should all be exercised if we find that our customs are not the customs current among the saints. "And now send me a man skilful to work in gold, and in silver, and in bronze, and in iron, and in purple and crimson and blue, and experienced in carving". These are the materials
{100}
which are going to be principally used in the temple. Solomon needs a man who knows how to work *in* these materials.
Ques. Why is wood not mentioned?
W.J.H. It says in verse 8, "Send me also cedar trees, cypress trees, and sandal-wood trees, out of Lebanon".
Ques. Why is gold mentioned first, while in chapter 1, silver is first?
W.J.H. In the temple, gold clearly has the highest prominence. On our side, silver must be first, that is, that we must be redeemed before God can do what He has in mind for us. But from His side, with His house in prospect, gold is the prime material. I do not think that we can have any idea of the quantity of gold that we would have seen in the temple. This man knows how to work *in gold*; Paul knew how to work in gold. Gold is divine love. The great glory of God is His love. Paul works at that in Corinth; he speaks about the love of God, the love of Christ and his own love. Even if he should be less loved, he would love them even more (@2 Corinthians 12: 15). He says to the Ephesians (@Ephesians 3: 19), "to know the love of
{101}
the Christ which surpasses knowledge". All Paul's work was in order to manifest it and to clothe the saints in it.
I. I suppose that this should be seen in the assembly and it is for us to be able to discern it.
W.J.H. If there are fifty brethren, there is a little gold in each one of them. We are not Christians if we do not love God, if we do not love Christ, if we do not love one another -- that is what gold represents. The gold is there, but who is going to work in gold, who is going to use it and to bring it out of the hearts of the brethren so that it should be at the disposal of the temple? In every local assembly, we need men to do this. It is the greatest glory, the most valuable part of the temple -- the gold. If there is no love, there is nothing. I can have "the tongues of men and of angels", but if I "have not love, I am nothing".
S.P. We are exhorted, in @Hebrews 10: 24, to "consider one another for provoking to love and good works".
W.J.H. Chapter 13 of the first epistle to the Corinthians has in view that the gold should be brought to light and to show what it is. How much gold have I obtained? It has been said that if the chapter were to be read while putting
{102}
my name into it, I would soon stop reading. This chapter is a description of what gold is. How much of it do I possess? How much does each one of us possess? We possess a little and this skilful man will use the little which we have. We know that the brethren love God, they love Christ, they love one another. It may be that this love is often hidden but we know that it is there. Paul brought it into evidence.
D.F. It is the most precious feature of an assembly since gold is the metal of highest value.
W.J.H. It is the highest standard in the world today. Silver has a lower currency than gold. Paper currency has little value. Gold is what is most precious; that is the idea.
L.D. The boards were overlaid with gold (@Exodus 36: 34).
W.J.H. They are covered with gold; what you see is love. But this man must also work well *in silver*. Thus every true Christian must pay a half shekel of silver in order to be numbered. If he does not have it, he is not numbered. We must refuse to recognise as Christian anyone in whom the silver is not seen.
{103}
Rem. In other words, we do not recognise as Christian anyone who does not enjoy redemption.
W.J.H. One who does not acknowledge it. A man who has silver acknowledges that Jesus is his Lord. We all recognise that Jesus is Lord. I hope that all here, even the children, confess Jesus as Lord. That is what silver is and we must work in silver, in order to make something with it for the temple.
L.D. The half shekel would be the proof that I am redeemed.
W.J.H. The blood is the divine side. We are redeemed by the precious blood of Christ but the half shekel is my side. I bring it in recognition that I have been bought. The blood and the silver both speak of redemption. One is what God has paid; the other is what I pay and without silver I am not numbered.
Rem. God has paid the price of redemption but the half shekel indicates that I recognise that I have been bought, that God has rights over me.
W.J.H. Paul worked in silver at Corinth. He speaks of those who "call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 1: 2). He says, "For we do not preach ourselves, but Christ Jesus
{104}
Lord" (@2 Corinthians 4: 5). He speaks of the Lord's supper, the Lord's table, the cup of the Lord, the body of the Lord, the death of the Lord. He works in silver in order to help us to give evidence of the silver, that is, that we belong to the Lord.
Ques. Would you say something about the other metals?
W.J.H. He must also be capable of work *in bronze* if he is going to be able to build. All the saints have a little bronze in them. I do not think that one could be converted without having a little bronze. Bronze typifies God's judgement of sin. It may be that we do not have much of it but we do have a little. It is what repentance produces. @Luke 15 speaks of a "repenting sinner", not a sinner who repented some twenty-five years ago. Are you a repenting sinner? Paul was one such. He hated sin more as an old man than when he was outside Damascus. Do we continue to hate what marked us previously, before our conversion? Do we continue to judge it and to judge it more and more? "And these things", says the apostle to the Corinthians, "were some of you" (@1 Corinthians 6: 11). That is where he built the temple.
{105}
M. You could not have the temple without all these things.
W.J.H. Yes, these are the things which enter into its construction.
J.M. Paul says, "Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom *I am* the first", and not, of whom I was the first (@1 Timothy 1: 15).
W.J.H. He says, "I excessively persecuted the assembly of God" (@Galatians 1: 13). He feels it more as he approaches the end of his course than he felt it at the beginning. There is "joy in heaven for one repenting sinner" (@Luke 15: 7). That is the bronze. Paul was working in bronze. How useful that is for the temple, the maintenance in our souls of a holy judgement of sin! It is very good for the temple, for the temple is holy. There are Christians who would like to have everything that is of gold but who do not want the bronze and who say, "Why should we judge such and such? Let us love one another and that will do". However, there can be no temple of God without the bronze. In @Ezra 8: 27, it speaks of shining copper as "precious as gold".
P.N. When the Lord was on the cross, the heavens were as brass.
W.J.H. "And thou art holy" (@Psalm 22: 3); that is the bronze. "My God, my God, why
{106}
hast thou forsaken me?" The heavens were closed.
Th.D. Practically, we begin with self-judgment; that is the bronze. We continue by confessing the Lord; that is the silver. Then divine love covers everything; that is the gold.
W.J.H. Yes. Here we have the divine side but it is different when we approach. "God ... enjoins men that they shall all everywhere repent" (@Acts 17: 30); that is the first thing. Then I confess Jesus as Lord. Consequently, "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us" (@Romans 5: 5).
The skilful man must also be able to work in *iron*. Iron, in Scripture, is a metal which represents strength. Neither gold, silver nor bronze carry the thought of strength. The Corinthians did not have much iron but Paul did. Read chapter 12 of the second epistle and see what had to be gone through; you will find there what is iron according to God.
M. "And David prepared iron in abundance for the nails" (@1 Chronicles 22: 3).
W.J.H. A division was beginning at Corinth but Paul brought all together by means of iron. He lists the sufferings
{107}
which he endured to introduce the element of strength and to curb the disintegration which was beginning to develop.
P.N. Can we say that John is taking account of the iron when he addresses the young men, saying, "I have written to you young men, because ye are strong" (@1 John 2: 14)?
W.J.H. Paul also alludes to iron -- he says, "What will ye? that I come to you with a rod?" (@1 Corinthians 4: 21). The Lord leads the flock with a rod. He does not wish to use it; however, He has it.
Rem. The apostle is slow to draw attention to his own sufferings.
L.D. He would not wish to use iron; nevertheless, the iron is there.
W.J.H. The nails are hidden, but they are there. He would not have wished to use the rod and he does not use it in his approach to them. But there is iron in the temple. The skilful man knows how to work in iron. We must all recognise that there is iron in the temple of God and God is watchful as to what remains there. It is possible that we might slip out of the temple, if we do not judge ourselves, but the temple of God remains in spite of everything.
D.F. Iron would represent firmness and faithfulness as to the truth at all times.
W.J.H. Nails hold things
{108}
together. If divine principles are given up, things come apart but if they are kept, everything holds together.
*Purple* has a great place in the Scriptures. It is the royal colour. The republics have given up purple. Brethren need to pay attention to this because what is national down here is the rejection of the purple. There is purple in the temple.
M. Does it mean recognition of the king?
W.J.H. It means first of all the recognition of the King of kings, who is Himself dressed in purple. But then, all kings also have purple. In @Revelation 19 He is called "King of *kings*". The subjects of the King, the Lord, are also themselves kings -- "Thou hast ... made them to our God kings and priests" (@Revelation 5: 10). Every believer is formed to be a king -- he is being formed as a king. What He has in view for us is that we should wear purple. Do we wear purple?
P.N. Do we find the thought of royalty linked with priesthood in the expression used by Peter in his first epistle -- "a kingly priesthood"
W.J.H. It is what is presented in @Revelation 5. The fact that we have the
{109}
purple is the proof that we are ready to suffer for the Lord until He come. Paul speaks about it to Timothy in these terms -- "if we endure, we shall also reign together" (@2 Timothy 2: 12). All those who suffer for Christ and for the truth wear purple. I feel that we must speak about it very humbly, because we know practically that we have little purple. However, Paul worked in purple at Corinth; he himself had much of it. He says that he is going to reign, but then again, "I would that ye reigned, that we also might reign with you" (@1 Corinthians 4: 8).
Th.D. He reproached them for reigning too early.
W.J.H. It is remarkable that Christianity penetrated into Europe in relation to a woman who was a seller of purple. We cannot come into the assembly if we sell this world's purple. She needed another purple and she is ready to suffer for this purple.
Th.D. The Corinthians did not possess the true purple when they wanted to reign.
W.J.H. But Paul had it and he works in purple to help them to obtain it.
J.M. Does the "reproach of the Christ"
{110}
convey the idea of the purple?
W.J.H. That is how it manifests itself now. What is in reproach down here is glorious according to God. Peter says, "If ye are reproached in the name of Christ, blessed are ye; for the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you" (@1 Peter 4: 14). No one should suffer as an evildoer; that is not the purple. "But if as a christian ... glorify God in this name."
Th.D. The soldiers put a robe of purple on the Lord (@John 19: 2).
W.J.H. They did it in mockery, but it was very true that He was king. The dying malefactor saw the purple when he said, "...when thou comest in thy kingdom" (@Luke 23: 42). He desired to be in His kingdom, in the kingdom of Him who was suffering at that time. Never was seen so much purple as at the cross.
Th.D. The soldiers clothed Him in purple and Pilate wrote that He was "King of the Jews".
W.J.H. "...to do whatever thy hand and thy counsel had determined before should come to pass" (@Acts 4: 28), for He was the king and purple was His colour. We have to know how to work in purple for the temple. I am sure that the element of purple,
{111}
which is found in this region, has emerged through our brethren who suffered at the times of the Huguenots. I have no doubt that the seed of what is of God in these mountains comes from the sufferings of our brethren and we wish to maintain the purple.
He must know how to work *in crimson*. Red is a beautiful colour which has a great place in Scripture. Its first mention is in the name of Adam, which means red earth; not simply earth, but red earth. God has great thoughts regarding man. As to his body, he is a very humble being, far short of being as great as an angel. However, God had great thoughts for man. "Let us make man in our image" (@Genesis 1: 26) -- that is the red. It is a conspicuous colour; red is not hidden. This man must work in crimson.
M. Different words are used in referring to this colour -- red, crimson, scarlet.
W.J.H. These are different shades of the same colour. The idea is the same but the intensity varies.
L.D. Do we have the thought in the epistle to the Corinthians -- "Do ye not recognise yourselves
{112}
that Jesus Christ is in you"? (@2 Corinthians 13: 5).
W.J.H. What emerges from all the colours is that Jesus Christ is marked by them all. The veil is of blue, purple and scarlet -- that is, in His flesh here. The Lord did not seek popularity but He could not be hidden. In @Mark 7: 24, it says, "He could not be hid". Wherever Jesus is seen, you see the red; He is distinct.
I. When Adam hid among the trees in the garden, do you think that he was seeking to hide the red?
W.J.H. He had lost the sense of what the red means, the sense of true greatness according to God. So he took fig leaves and covered himself with them. It is what women in the world do; they try to appear great by their dress. Peter would say to such to get other ornaments, "a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price", "the hidden man of the heart" (@1 Peter 3: 4). Such is Jesus; He is hidden, but you cannot hide Him. That is the idea conveyed by the red.
P.N. If we are in accord with Christ, do we correspond to what is red?
{113}
W.J.H. You are alluding to the red heifer and to the rams¬ skins dyed red. That is the red which we need. The false woman in the book of Revelation is clothed in scarlet but there is nothing in her of the red heifer. The red heifer is love, which suffers zealously. It can go even into the fire and be burned, providing the ashes of purification so that the people can be cleansed. The rams¬ skins dyed red relate to the devotion of Christ even unto death. This is that in which the apostle sought to work in Corinth, in order to produce this element in the saints. The crimson is seen in them as devotion and suffering love.
J.P. Would you say a few words on verse 18 of the first chapter of Isaiah -- "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow".
W.J.H. This colour is referred to because such are our sins. Who will be able to hide them? We might be able to hide them from the eyes of others but who will hide them in the presence of God?
M. This Scripture shows that there is a way of removing them, of making them disappear, however glaring they may be.
W.J.H. "To him who loves us, and
{114}
has washed us from our sins in his blood" (@Revelation 1: 5) -- that is God's way.
The skilful man works *in blue*. It is the colour of the sky. Wherever you see blue, you think of heaven. When you consider Jesus, you always think of heaven. The blue was seen primarily in Him. Blue, purple and scarlet were in the veil. In whatever situation Christ is seen, blue is evident everywhere. "Jehovah, bow thy heavens, and come down" (@Psalm 144: 5). God bowed the heavens down as far as here below with Jesus at the centre. This blue must be found in the temple. The skilful man must work in blue, manifesting heavenly features in the saints. If you consider Stephen, you really see heaven. You see the purple, the scarlet and the blue. If there was ever a king here below among the saints, it was Stephen. If there was someone outstanding under the eye of God, it was Stephen. If the character of heaven was seen in man, it was in Stephen. That must all enter into the temple, because it belongs to the temple of God.
We might perhaps refer to engraving (or sculpture). This man had to know how to engrave. What is engraved has a most important place in the temple. A deep and *permanent* impression is left in an article made of wood. Think of what is
{115}
engraved on the saints and which will never be erased. Three things in particular were engraved on wood -- these were the cherubim, palm trees and half-open flowers (@1 Kings 6: 32). There was no need to engrave these things on the Lord as man. Everything was found in Him; but they must be engraved on us. How wonderful to behold a man having the cherubim engraved on Him. Paul went to Corinth with the cherubim, the palm trees and the half-open flowers engraved on him.
M. What does that mean?
W.J.H. Everywhere around them, the cherubim protect God's interests. They will admit nothing erroneous. The palm trees represent victory -- "But thanks be to God, who always leads us in triumph in the Christ" (@2 Corinthians 2: 14). The half-open flowers represent beauty. Paul does not try to express beauty; the beauty is in him. Beauty is added by the flowers being half-open; it is a flower's most beautiful stage. This engraving is a magnificent divine thought, what is established in permanent fashion in the saints. It is included in the wonderful greatness of the work of God. "The house ... shall be great and wonderful".
{116}
ENIGMAS
@2 Chronicles 9:1,2; @Judges 14:5-14
The world is full of disconcerting difficulties which the wisdom of man cannot resolve; some nations find themselves in situations which are desperate. But the queen of Sheba found a man capable of response to all her enigmas. It says that "Solomon explained to her all she spoke of". She had difficult questions but she had heard of the wisdom of Solomon and she approached him with all her difficulties. Do you have any? If you do, I would point you to someone who can answer them all. If you don't have any, then it is time that you had some. It is important and urgent to have some of these difficulties which human beings have to face up to. There is little time left to find solutions.
A question which often arises in the human mind is "Who shall cause us to see good?" (@Psalm 4: 6). Where is good to be found? Is there any in France, in England, in America? I wonder if you think that there is good to be found in you. God knows better than any what there is
{117}
in your heart. He says, "There is none that doeth good, not even one" (@Psalm 14: 3). Thus, "He that confideth in his own heart is a fool" (@Proverbs 28: 26). So where is good to be found? That is a question to resolve.
Another question which should arise in your heart and conscience is -- 'What shall I do about my sins? They are a heavy burden to me.' David said, "For mine iniquities are gone over my head -- as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me." (@Psalm 38: 4). What must I do? Forget about them? God does not forget them. Everything is written in His books and His books are never burned. Do you think that you can leave them behind you? Ah! God requires what has gone before. So what are you going to do about your sins? That is another serious question.
Job raises another one -- "But how can man be just with God?" (@Job 9: 2). Job was the best man of his time. God says that "there is none like him on the earth" (@Job 1: 8). In spite of that, Job asks, "But how can man be just with God?" He asks this question at the point where the seven eyes of God are on him -- "The eyes of Jehovah are in every place,
{118}
beholding the evil and the good" (@Proverbs 15: 3). When the eyes of God are on him, Job asks, "But how can man be just with God?" He says, "If I washed myself with snow water, and cleansed my hands in purity, then wouldest thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes would abhor me" (@Job 9: 30, 31).
In Jeremiah (@Jeremiah 12: 5), there is another enigma -- "how wilt thou then do in the swelling of the Jordan?" When the power of death arises, when you have to meet it, when death knocks at your door, what will you do? That is a great enigma. Will you be able to stop the floodtide of death? You will not. You will not be able to avoid the overflowing of Jordan; you will have to enter it, for "it is the portion of men once to die" (@Hebrews 9: 27). What will you do when you see it overflowing? Every human heart carries this enigma. And after death comes judgement. You will have to meet God; what will you do then?
These are the great enigmas for every human heart. They were there in the heart of the queen of Sheba. She brought all these difficult question into the presence of Solomon. "She came from the ends of
{119}
the earth", according to Matthew's gospel (@Matthew 12: 42). Is that where you live? Although living in this town, you could be at the ends of the earth. The earth's centre, according to God, is Jesus; perhaps you are far from Him. You have never thought about Him; you have never approached Him. He is the divine centre for heaven and earth. If you were able to look into heaven now, you would see Jesus in the midst of the throne. And on earth, He is the centre of everything for God. You are at the "ends of the earth", in "a far country"; what are you doing there? There, you will lose everything and nothing will be given to you; you will have everything to pay. So what will you be able to have? The husks which the swine are eating; that is all there is in the far country. When you have no money left and your health is gone, the world will have nothing to do with you and all you will have is what belongs to the swine. The world feeds itself on that today, in images, in novels, in newspapers. Even in the religious world, alas, the food is often, in reality, what the swine are eating and starved hearts in the far country devour it avidly. In all sincerity, poor empty heart, is not that where you are?
{120}
The queen of Sheba came from the ends of the earth "to hear the wisdom of Solomon". We are here today to speak to you about the wisdom of Solomon, to speak to you about Him who is greater than Solomon, to speak to you about Jesus. He is "God's wisdom". He can answer every question. There is not a single question which He cannot answer. But do you really want to have to do with Him? The queen of Sheba brought gold and spices. She honoured Solomon; she did not despise him. If you despise Jesus, there is nothing for you but hell. "Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and perish" (@Acts 13: 41). There will be no reply to the questions of those who despise Jesus, while those who honour Him will have complete answers. How does He answer them?
He replies by another enigma. If you find the solution to it, you will have the answer to all your questions. Samson is a type of Christ, in the same way as Solomon. Samson offers a wonderful enigma to his hearers. Here is what happened. Samson was on a journey, seeking an object for his heart. A young lion came and roared against him but Samson rent it. Later, there was a swarm of bees in the carcase of the lion and
{121}
Samson took honey from it. This was the source of the enigma -- "Out of the eater came forth food, and out of the strong came forth sweetness". He says that if you can give me an explanation, I will give you new clothing such as you have never had before; if you don't explain it to me, you will lose your own clothing. And so it is. If you can state the meaning of this enigma, the Lord Jesus will attire you in a way that is suitable for heaven; he will dress you in clothing such as you have never, in your life, worn until now. If you cannot say what it means, you will lose the garments which you have and you will find yourself naked in the presence of God -- terrible condition! Can you explain this enigma? If you can, you will have the answer to all the difficult questions which arise in your heart. I can give you only the light of it; I cannot give your soul the understanding of it, but I can enlighten you as to it.
Samson is a figure of Jesus. The young lion is the devil; he has the power of death. When Jesus came to earth, to find an object for His heart, the young lion roared against Him. What happened then? There was a dreadful battle, a battle between two lions. Jesus is a lion,
{122}
"the lion of the tribe of Judah", the lion "which turneth not away for any" (@Proverbs 30: 30). He was never afraid of anyone. The devil is also a lion, "a roaring lion" (@1 Peter 5: 8). He roared as he came to meet Jesus.
What combat took place when Jesus was here. Even when He came into the world, as a little child, the powers of evil feared. Herod was afraid because Jesus was come and he put to death all the little children, in order to get rid of Jesus. Think of the combat which took place in the wilderness between the two lions, the true Samson and the young lion. The Lord emerged victorious. See Him again, as the lion of the tribe of Judah, at the tomb of Lazarus, crying with a loud voice in the cave of death where the body of Lazarus lay, and death fled -- "Lazarus, come forth". Think of Jesus in Gethsemane. What terrible combat between the two lions as Satan sought to overwhelm the Lord! See him at Calvary; the young lion is there, ready to devour the true Samson. But, in dying, Jesus was victorious "that through death he might annul him who has the might of death, that is, the devil" (@Hebrews 2: 14). Why did Jesus, the strong lion, have to go through death?
{123}
The true Samson, "the lion which is of the tribe of Judah ... has overcome" (@Revelation 5: 5). How has He overcome? John hears in heaven that the lion of the tribe of Judah has prevailed. He looks around to see this great lion which always prevails and he sees a little lamb, "a Lamb standing, as slain". In dying, He has overcome. Instead of death, we find the sweetest of honey. The sweetest thing that can be known is found in the carcase of the lion, in the very place of death. Dear friends, if you were able to understand this enigma, you would have the answer to all your questions.
"Who shall cause us to see good?" (@Psalm 4: 6). All the good of heaven is seen at Calvary. One day, a man came to Jesus saying to Him -- "Good teacher". Jesus answered him, "Why callest thou me good? No one is good but one, that is God" (@Mark 10: 18). All that is good comes from God; we can see that at Calvary. Good is found neither in men, nor in nations, but in God, and all God's goodness is seen in the death of Jesus.
What will you do about your sins? What a serious question! The divine answer is given at Calvary. Jesus will remove your sins.
{124}
"Who himself bore our sins in his body on the tree" (@1 Peter 2: 24). "Christ died for our sins" (@1 Corinthians 15: 3). He will remove them forever and no one will ever be able to find them. It says as to those who believe in Him, "the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found" (@Jeremiah 50: 20). What has happened? John says, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood" (@Revelation 1: 5). In the carcase of the lion there is a sweetness which is the consequence of the removal of our sins.
"How can man be just with God?" How can we stand justified before God? Justification means not simply that God does not condemn us (that in itself would be wonderful), but that we have His approval and that He finds pleasure in us. How will man be justified before God? Come to the carcase of the lion and you will have the solution to this enigma -- "Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth a mercy seat, through faith in his blood ... so that he should be just, and justify him that is of the faith of Jesus" (@Romans 3: 25, 26). "Faith in his blood"; it is faith in his death which allows God to justify sinners.
{125}
The apostle Paul says we believe "on him who justifies the ungodly" (@Romans 4: 5). You will not deny that you are numbered among the ungodly. Are you like God? No. How can you have God's approval? He can give you His approval if you eat of the honey in the carcase of the lion, that is, if you come to the death of Jesus. The psalmist says "Taste", taste it, "and see that Jehovah is good" (@Psalm 34: 8). And Peter says, "if indeed ye have tasted that the Lord is good" (@1 Peter 2: 3).
We now come, dear friends, to the question of death. How can you and how can I meet death whose powerful floodtide swallows up humanity? Millions upon millions have been swallowed up. It might soon be you. How far is death from you? How long do you have to live? If I were to put this question to a child, he might give me fifty years as an answer. Is he sure about that? If I were to ask a young man, he might say twenty years. Can he be sure about it? If I were to ask an old man, he might say ten years. But how can he be sure about it? It is possible that death might catch you unawares at any moment. David said, "there is but a step between me and death" (@1 Samuel 20: 3).
{126}
Only one step might remain to someone among us here. How shall we cross the torrent? By coming to the carcase of the lion. See how Samson has torn it, even although he had nothing in his hand. See the Lord Jesus entering death; He speaks to death. You cannot speak to death. He says, "where, O death, are thy plagues? where, O Sheol, is thy destruction?" (@Hosea 13: 14). If you simply wish to come, this is the way in which you will be able to cross over. Come with this difficult question to Jesus and He will arrange everything for you.
"and after this judgment" (@Hebrews 9: 27). What an enigma! What a problem! "all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do (@Hebrews 4: 13). God says, "I live ... that to me shall bow every knee, and every tongue shall confess to God" (@Romans 14: 11). God says, "I live". There may perhaps be someone here who thinks that God does not live. How, then, could anyone live? If God does not live, how can anyone be alive? How can a blade of grass live, an ant, a bird, a cow? How could you yourself live? How could any one of us live, if God
{127}
is not alive? Who made life? It was not a man, nor all men together. It is not possible for man to make a worm or a blade of grass. Man can kill a worm or cut a blade of grass but he cannot produce life. Man goes as far as to say, "There is no God", but God says that this man is a fool (@Psalm 14: 1). God says, "I am living". You have to meet God. He addresses himself to us, saying, "prepare to meet thy God" (@Amos 4: 12), because after death there is the judgment. How will it be possible for me to face the judgment? In coming again to Calvary. There, I find the answer to this enigma. Why was Jesus on the cross? Why did He hang there? Why was He made a curse? Why was judgment poured on Him? It was so that it should not fall on you. Such is God's answer to this enigma. The Lord Jesus Himself said, "if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me" (@John 12: 32). He is the great lover. If you are not drawn to Him, you will go to hell. "I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me". He said this in order to indicate the death by which He was going to die. And what a death it was, dear friends! Why did Jesus have to be
{128}
made a curse? I could understand it if the hanged malefactor had been made a curse. In fact, he himself recognises the justice of this. He says, "and we indeed justly" (@Luke 23: 41). I can understand that wicked Haman should have been hanged on gallows. It is easy to see why Ahasuerus sent Haman to the gallows. I can also understand easily why the chief of the bakers had to be hanged, having displeased the king. "And him he hanged" (@Genesis 41: 13). But why did Jesus hang? Why was He crucified? Why did He bear the curse? That provides the answer to your difficult question. He went through everything so that we might be freed. How can I face the judgment? I go to the carcase of the lion and I eat of its honey, the sweetest thing in the world. *He*, Jesus, was crucified for *me*. Paul raises the question among the Corinthians, "has Paul been crucified for you?" (@1 Corinthians 1: 13). No, he had not been crucified for them, but Jesus had. How did the dying robber get the answer to his enigma? He was led to understand Samson's enigma, not because he had read the answer in the Bible, but because he turned to Jesus. He understood why Jesus was dying. He tasted the honey in the carcase of the lion. Where can
{129}
good be truly found? The dying robber can tell us -- "but this man has done nothing amiss" (@Luke 23: 41). Goodness is found there. It is not to be found in me; it is found in Him. What about my sins? Who will remove them? The answer is that they are laid on the man who has done nothing amiss. Death is there, the great abyss ready to swallow the robber. How will he go into death? He will enter with Jesus, the master and conqueror of death. The judgment of God must also be faced. The curse is there but the robber sees the One who bears everything for him. He comes to understand the enigma in a way that resolves every question for him. Not a single question remains unresolved. The true Solomon has explained them all.
What happens then? The true Solomon provides new garments for this man. He takes off "the filthy garments" (@Zechariah 3: 4). But the man is not left naked; he is dressed in heaven's most beautiful robe, a white garment suitable for the holy presence of God. "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise". Would he be in paradise unsuitably dressed? No, never. His dress is in every way suited to this place.
{130}
The elders in heaven convey this. They have white robes because they have tasted the honey from the lion's carcase and they have been able to explain the enigma. "Thou hast been slain, and hast redeemed to God, by thy blood, out of every tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation" (@Revelation 5: 9). They have interpreted Samson's enigma. They have had an answer to all their difficult questions. They have come in faith to Jesus, the true Solomon, the One who is truly greater than Solomon. Will you do the same, dear friends? Who could answer your enigmas, apart from Jesus? If you do not come to Him, it will be completely impossible for you to find the solution.
Samson said that if no one could answer, they would all have to give up their own garments. If you cannot explain the enigma, you will have to give up what you consider to be a sufficient covering. What do you have to cover yourself? Some fig leaves? What is the value of that in the presence of God? Fig leaves satisfied Adam temporarily -- but, when God came near to him, he felt how everything was unworthy of His presence and he said, "I am naked". "I feared because I am naked" (@Genesis 3: 10). He did not speak about the fig leaves. He knew well that they were nothing to God.
{131}
How many there are who say, "I do have some righteousness". They are like the Pharisee who said, "God, I thank thee that I am not as the rest of men" (@Luke 18: 11). When God looks at such garments, He says that our righteousnesses are "as filthy rags" (@Isaiah 64: 6). You may think that you are beautifully dressed with garments which are suitable to the presence of God, but they are like the leopard's skin, which is covered with spots. The spots cannot be removed. "Can an Ethiopian change his skin, or a leopard his spots?" (@Jeremiah 13: 23). It is not within your power to cleanse your garments. If you do not want to pay attention to the enigma, all your clothes will disappear and, naked, you will have to meet God. The only suitable clothes are provided by Jesus. He will wash you in His precious blood; He will give you the Holy Spirit. The Lord Jesus speaks to His disciples of being "clothed with power from on high" (@Luke 24: 49). To all those who come to understand the enigma, the Lord Jesus gives the Spirit of God, so that believers are clothed in features which are characteristic of Christ -- "clothed with power from on high".
Dear friends, there is only one Person
{132}
capable of answering all your difficult questions, but, in answering them, He sets you an enigma whose solution leads you to understand the meaning of His death, not only as intelligence but by faith and in love. Thus all the questions of your heart will be resolved.
May the Lord make it thus for every one!
{133}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD - FOURTH READING
@2 Chronicles 2:8-18
W.J.H. Most of us would know that we have been considering the great subject of the temple, which represents the wonderful work which is the present occupation of Divine Persons. There is what God did at the beginning, when He created the heavens and the earth, and He finished them. There is also what the Father has done hitherto; the Lord says, "My father worketh hitherto" (@John 5: 17). That is something entirely different from the works of creation. We have the operations of grace in the Old Testament. Then we have what the Lord did here below. But there is also what the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are doing at present. No intelligent person could accept that Divine Persons could be inactive. Could the Almighty be inactive? It matters, therefore, for us to see what God is doing and to have our part in it. That has been our subject until now. Solomon is the great builder of the house of God,
{134}
the temple. It represents Christ in glory, using servants down here to find and assemble the materials.
So we come to this wonderful message, "Send me also cedar-trees, cypress-trees, and sandalwood-trees, out of Lebanon". Sandals were made from sandalwood. Solomon knows that they are needed; he says, 'Send me those trees'. He also knows from where he wants them. He does not want any kind of tree, nor trees of whatever provenance. He needs these three kinds and they must be from Lebanon.
M. What is the meaning of Lebanon for us?
W.J.H. It is the highest point in the land, with an altitude of more than three thousand metres. It represents a region in contact with heaven and under its influence. Solomon wants trees, which come from there, trees which grow down here under the influence of heaven. That is a thought which tests us. Do we live on Lebanon? Perhaps we live in Egypt or in the cities of the plain near to Sodom. Solomon does not want wood from these places.
Ques. Three places are mentioned -- Lebanon, Joppa and Jerusalem. What do they suggest?
{135}
W.J.H. We have just been speaking about Lebanon; it is an elevated place in contact with heaven. Jerusalem is the city of the great king; there, the authority of the king is absolute. Joppa is beside the sea and the wood had to come down through water, which means that we must accept death here to be available for the temple. If we wish to be characterised, in some measure, by the features of the temple, we have to grow on Lebanon. Our whole life must be subject to the influence of heaven. Strictly speaking, we are not in heaven but we grow under its influence. It is of all importance that there should be such trees; it is not possible to have the temple without them. Where men and women live under the influence of heaven in their families and in their businesses, there is a representation of the trees of Lebanon.
Rem. Egypt, on the contrary, is under the influence of the Nile.
W.J.H. And its waters are blood. All who live under this influence will die. Thanks to God, there are trees of Lebanon here. We know brothers and sisters here who live under the influence of heaven. There is nothing sweeter than to enter the house of a brother or sister and to taste there the influence of heaven -- "love
{136}
out of a pure heart" (@1 Timothy 1: 5). We need even more, dear brethren, in order to have the character of the temple in increased measure.
M. Would you develop a little what you understand by the acceptance of death?
W.J.H. The apostle says, "*always* bearing about in the body the *dying* of Jesus" (@2 Corinthians 4: 10). We have to admit that, as to our bodies, we are going to die, if the Lord should delay His coming. Our families will come to an end; death will claim those whom we love. As to our businesses, we shall leave them; they will not always occupy us. We must accept this so that we do not become too absorbed by these things. Some Christians are too concerned about their health; others, especially sisters, direct all their energy to their families. Some brothers devote themselves entirely to their businesses. But we must realise that all these things are destined to perish; we must live under the influence of heaven.
Rem. Would you not say that things must be done in the light of resurrection? These trees were put into the water with the prospect of retrieving them later.
W.J.H. What helps us is to have heard from Solomon, 'I need these
{137}
trees; I need them for God'. This is the message, "The Lord has need of it" (@Mark 11: 3). He wants us all for His temple. That helps us to accept death down here.
M. Do you mean that the temple is not built in the world? It is on the earth but it is not of the world. The house of God is still on the earth. There is a ladder which rises from the house of God to heaven -- the angels of God ascend and descend upon it and God stands at the top of the ladder. Think of having, in Valence, a direct communication with heaven. How wonderful to spend a single day in such a house.
I. Does the fact that God is at the top of the ladder suggest that He is near to us?
W.J.H. It means that God is in direct communication with His house.
Rem. It might be useful to consider more closely these three trees.
W.J.H. Solomon says, "Send me also cedar-trees, cypress-trees, and sandalwood-trees, out of Lebanon". These trees are found, according to God, only on Lebanon. The cedar is the royal tree -- it grows majestically above the others. The cypress is an evergreen -- it never withers.
{138}
Sandalwood provides the wood for the most beautiful sandals you can wear. We are told that Solomon made the stairs for the house of Jehovah from sandalwood. "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that announceth glad tidings" (@Isaiah 52: 7). That is what is suggested by sandalwood. Looking at His sandals, John says, "I am not worthy to unloose the thong". He felt that they were so beautiful that he was unworthy to touch them. If we live under the influence of Egypt, we shall be morally small and contemptible, instead of being cedars. If our roots are in the river of Egypt, our leaves will wither but, if we live under the influence of heaven, our leaves will always be green. If we submit to the influence of Egypt, our feet will be directed towards the paths which go down to hell; but if we live under the influence of heaven, our steps will ascend towards the house of God. One wonders sometimes, why the leaf of a brother or a sister has withered; God might give us to see the cause. It is found that they have radio in their house and they are drinking from the river of Egypt, or they are reading novels secretly or perhaps they are spending a lot of time reading newspapers, in such a way that
{139}
their leaf is withering. Let us live on Lebanon and remain green like the cypress.
P.N. That reminds me of what is said about Lebanon and the green cypress at the end of Hosea, "I am like a green fir tree" (@Hosea 14: 8).
W.J.H. "What have I to do any more with idols?" (@Hosea 14: 8); if we live in relation to idols, we shall soon wither.
Then we see the promises of Solomon for those who engage in this service. That is something wonderful, dear brethren, which we cannot know without having had the experience of it. We see what Solomon puts at the disposal of those who undertake this service. It is wonderful to be able to participate in this service, even without taking account of the recompense. However, Solomon makes promises to those who serve. The Lord is always faithful to His promises. There is a place in God's building for every Christian on the earth, because it is the greatest thing which God has ever made; it is far greater than the heavens. God made the heavens. He made the earth much more, it says, "but he who has built *all* things is God" (@Hebrews 3: 4) but the assembly of God is the greatest building which has ever been built.
{140}
P.N. As to the wheat which is referred to here, could it be linked to Israel, who could not eat of the old corn of the land until they had crossed the Jordan when it overflowed all its banks?
W.J.H. The wheat alludes to that. Solomon promises "twenty thousand measures of *beaten wheat*", wheat with no trace of chaff, "and twenty thousand measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty thousand baths of oil". That is what is promised to those who serve.
Ques. You have said that there is no chaff in the wheat. What does the chaff represent?
W.J.H. What is worthless, destined to be burnt and the world is full of it. Here we have "beaten wheat", that is, sifted.
J.M. These provisions were for those who cut down the trees.
W.J.H. It is the part of those who are ready to work, for this service is hard work. This was Phoebe's part, "minister of the assembly ... for *she* also has been a helper of many and of myself" (@Romans 16: 2). The Lord promises to make these things available to whoever engages in the service. He will give
{141}
the best of the wheat. Wheat corresponds, I think, to an appreciation of Christ in relation to the eternal purpose of God. It is the wheat put in reserve by God from eternity, "which he purposed in himself" before the ages of time. If anyone wishes to have part in this service, God will give him to know Christ in relation to the eternal thoughts of God. That is what is better. Wheat is better than barley.
P.G. In the book of Ruth, it begins with barley but here it is with wheat.
W.J.H. We shall come to the barley shortly. Here, the Lord promises first of all what is better, "A choenix of wheat for a denarius, and three choenixes of barley for a denarius" (@Revelation 6: 6). I think that most Christians are content with a little of the Passover, the food that saves them from the judgment of this world; they will be saved from hell; they will go to heaven, but that is not the wheat. The wheat goes well above that. No one can taste the wheat unless they find an interest in the house of God. I do not think that any Christian knows what the wheat is without definite engagement in the house of God.
{142}
P.N. Could we say that Gideon was a good worker and an overcomer, because he is first presented to us as active in threshing wheat?
W.J.H. In that connection, he was a "mighty man of valour". If we have a view of Christ according to divine purpose, we are mighty men, because the counsel of God remains. No power, neither earthly nor infernal, can overthrow the purpose of God. "Jehovah is with thee, thou mighty man of valour", it says (@Judges 6: 12). Later, he is seen in the cake of barley bread, tumbling into the camp of Midian. So Solomon says, I will give them "twenty thousand measures of barley". That is also very good food. It will soon overturn the world, just as the cake of barley bread overturned the camp of Midian. It is said of Paul and Silas, "These men that have set the world in tumult, are come here also" (@Acts 17: 6). How were they able to overturn the world? By eating barley -- barley is Christ in resurrection. Wheat is Christ in heaven as Son of God. The barley harvest comes first; it comes before the wheat harvest. Barley speaks of Christ out of death; the barley was seen down here for forty days.
{143}
This food, assimilated by the soul, overturns the world. The apostle says, "to know him, and the power of his resurrection" (@Philippians 3: 10). If we wish to find interest in the house of God, dear brethren, the Lord will give us barley. He will make us to know the power of His resurrection, so that we should live in the resurrection world. It is not in heaven; it is here on the earth.
J.M. Wheat establishes us in relation to the eternal purpose of God and barley makes us able to be overcomers down here.
G.A. The time of the barley harvest is therefore a precious moment.
W.J.H. As to ourselves, we begin there. Ruth came to the barley harvest, then followed the wheat harvest. There is great power in resurrection. Nothing can resist resurrection. Think of Christ out of death -- for forty days. He was down here, assembling with His disciples, in order to make them know the power of His resurrection -- that is the barley. The Lord offers twenty thousand measures to those who work at the house of God, but Christ, as man in heaven, is the wheat, which is even more precious than the barley.
Then, "twenty thousand baths of wine". It is the good wine of chapter 2 of
{144}
John -- "thou hast kept the good wine till now".
P.N. Is it the wine which is spoken of in Song of Songs -- "He hath brought me to the house of wine" (@Song of Songs 2: 4)?
W.J.H. He has mixed his wine; he has prepared it and he gives it to those who are working. I wonder if we have tasted this wine. Peter had tasted it; he knows "joy unspeakable and filled with the glory" (@1 Peter 1: 8), a joy which words cannot express. Ineffable joy is the part of those who are ready to work at the house of God. Paul and Silas felled trees at Philippi. When they were in the prison, their feet in chains, working at this great work, the Lord came to them bringing baths of wine. At midnight, the darkest point, they were praying and singing praise to God. All who wish to work will have this experience.
Ques. "I will no more drink at all of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God" (@Mark 14: 25). Does that refer to the present time?
W.J.H. I think that it can be applied to the present time. The kingdom of God has arisen in our hearts. I believe that the Lord receives much wine from His own today, the wine "which cheers
{145}
God" (@Judges 9: 13).
What comes last, but which are not least in importance, are the "twenty thousand baths of oil". Perhaps we have most need of the oil. The effect of the oil, dear brethren, is to make a man's face to shine. That was Stephen's portion. He had the wheat, the barley and the wine but he also had the oil. His face was seen "as the face of an angel" (@Acts 6: 15). The very light of heaven was shining in his face; that is the effect of the oil. Solomon says, 'I will give twenty thousand baths of oil, in order to make the faces of all those who take part in the work to shine with heavenly dignity'.
G.M. "Twenty thousand baths" is not a small quantity.
W.J.H. Let no one think that they will receive of this oil without working. If our faces are not shining, we are lacking in oil.
Ques. Can we say that they work "together in unity", as it says in one of the Songs of Degrees? It adds, "Like the precious oil upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, upon Aaron's beard, that ran down to the hem of his garments;" (@Psalm 133: 2).
W.J.H. "Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!"
{146}
These workers were completely united in view of the great objective, the temple.
M. The number twenty thousand is frequently repeated.
W.J.H. Twenty is two times ten. Multiples of ten recur in all the measurements here. It seems to suggest what is established in a sphere of responsibility. There is enough wine to fill every heart with joy in this scene of responsibility. I think that, with twenty thousand baths, there is enough oil to make the face of every Christian on earth to shine. It is an allusion to the Holy Spirit as the unction.
M. Does a shining face convey happiness?
W.J.H. I think that it is more a matter of heavenly dignity. Joy is linked with wine. These twenty thousand baths, and much more, came on Jesus when He was anointed. The Holy Spirit descended on Him in a bodily form, that is, in totality. We are able to receive only a small quantity of oil but only a few drops of this heavenly oil will make the face of a Christian shine.
Rem. It says of Stephen that he was "full of the Holy Spirit" (@Acts 7: 55).
W.J.H. That is the oil. We need
{147}
dignity if we wish to be in the temple. Nothing mean will enter the temple -- malice, guile, envy, evil speaking will never enter the temple of God. How contemptible all these things are! The world is full of them but the oil gives us the dignity of heaven. So Hiram replies that it is a good proposal and that he accepts it. "And now the wheat and the barley, the oil and the wine, which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto his servants" (@2 Chronicles 2: 15). The offer is accepted. It is what we want to arrive at now. Let us do the same as Job. He says, "Behold my signature" (@Job 31: 35). We have to append our signature as indication that we accept the proposal.
M. Why does Hiram reply to Solomon in writing?
W.J.H. It is just what we have been saying -- "Behold my signature". The thing is in writing; we are committed. It is good to see brothers and sisters devoted to God's interests. Anna in the temple was one such, serving God day and night until the Lord should come. He is coming soon and we want to be found engaged in His interests.
Ques. Do we find this commitment with Rebecca when she says, "I will go"?
W.J.H. It is the same thought. There is a
{148}
difference between saying or writing something and having it in the heart or mind. You cannot draw back from what you have said or written. I am sure that it is for that reason that many young people do not ask to break bread. They do not wish to be bound. When they partake of the bread and the cup, they commit themselves in fellowship. "And Solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land of Israel, after the account that David his father had taken of them, and there were found a hundred and fifty-three thousand six hundred. And he set seventy thousand of them to be bearers of burdens, and eighty thousand to be stone-masons in the mountains, and three thousand six hundred overseers to set the people to work." Ultimately, we have our part on the basis of mercy, for we are almost all strangers, "strangers to the covenants of promise" (@Ephesians 2: 12).
Ques. Why is there reference to the numbering which David had made?
W.J.H. I think it is right to distinguish them from each other. This latest numbering is not in order to show their strength but to demonstrate the greatness of the divine mercy, which engages the whole of this multitude of strangers in this wonderful work. It is in this way that in @Ephesians 2: 11, 12,
{149}
the apostle says, "Wherefore remember that *ye*, once nations in the flesh, who are called uncircumcision by that called circumcision in the flesh done with the hand; that ye were at that time without Christ, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world".
Rem. The Lord said that he had other sheep who were not of this fold.
W.J.H. What feelings these sheep must have when they are brought into His flock! What feelings fill our hearts when we realise that we have part in this great and wonderful edifice! What feelings filled the heart of Paul, the great architect. He says, I was before "a blasphemer and persecutor, and an insolent overbearing man -- but mercy was shown me" (@1 Timothy 1: 13). The grace of our Lord had overabounded in establishing him in this service. Such are the feelings of strangers, when they go up to the mountain to find wood. At every step they can say, "I thank Christ Jesus our Lord" (@1 Timothy 1: 12).
{150}
HIS TRAIN FILLED THE TEMPLE
@Isaiah 6:1-8; @Romans 16
It is good to remember the words of the Lord in @John 12, "These things said Esaias because he saw his glory and spoke of him" (@John 12: 41). I wonder if all here have "seen his glory". Have you ever seen the glory of Jesus? If you had seen it your mouth would open; you would have something to say. A brother who has seen His glory will not remain silent in the assembly. Isaiah spoke *because* he saw His glory. Saul said of himself, "I could not see, through the glory of that light" (@Acts 22: 11). His eyes were closed forever to the glory of this world, because of "the glory of that light". It is what happens when you see Jesus -- your eyes close to the world, you no longer see anything here, you open your eyes on another world. When Paul's eyes were opened, it was not to see the world. He says, "we see Jesus ... crowned with glory and honour" (@Hebrews 2: 9). He also saw Ananias; he says, "I ... received my sight and saw him" (@Acts 22: 13). He saw a brother, someone
{151}
who could say to him, "Saul, brother". When you see the glory of Jesus, you speak about Him and you also see what belongs to Him on the earth -- you see the brethren.
It says, "In the year of the death of king Uzziah, I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up". The prophet tells us when this took place -- it was in the year of the death of king Uzziah, *that particular year*. I wonder if we understand the significance of that year. I do not think that we ever see the glory of the Lord, without having reached that year. Christendom has not reached it. A wonderful vision of glory is given to those who reach it.
Uzziah was a great king; it says, "he was marvellously helped" (@2 Chronicles 26: 15). He fought the Philistines, the Arabians and the Ammonites; he dug wells, he planted vineyards on the mountains, he made many weapons and God helped him. There is a typical allusion to the Reformation, to the way in which God helped faithful men at that time. What great things were accomplished! How many enemies were overcome! How many wells were dug! But there came a moment in the life of Uzziah, when he went into the temple of God in place of the priest, where he tried to carry out the service of God without the priest.
{152}
At that point, leprosy rose up on his forehead and he was leprous until the day of his death. This is what has happened to Protestantism. Although there was a wonderful work of God, divine service is now exercised without the priest, without the priestly condition, without holiness, without the Spirit of God and leprosy has appeared on its forehead. The spirit of modern christendom is leprous; that is evident. All that remains now for Uzziah is to die and be buried.
But, among the people of God, there are some who have understood what the year of the death of king Uzziah is and a great vision of glory has arisen in their souls. I do not know if all here are in this year. This vision will not appear to us if we are not in this year. So Isaiah said, "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up". He received a new impression of the greatness of God and the greatness of His throne. It says that "his train filled the temple". God has a wonderful robe, whose train descends from heaven right down to earth. He is "clothed with majesty and splendour" (@Psalm 104: 1) -- that is the train. It "filled the temple".
There were seraphim who called to each other, "Holy, holy, holy". That is
{153}
what they are saying at present, dear brethren. They insist on the holiness of God, on the holiness of Jesus, on the holiness of the temple. They do not draw attention to themselves; no one is great in God's temple, apart from God and Jesus, the blessed ark of the covenant. They alone are great in the temple. The seraphim have six wings. With two they cover their faces -- all who stand properly in the temple cover their faces; they do not attempt to appear great. God is so great that they hide themselves. With two wings they cover their feet -- their movements are not for the projection of themselves but to serve God and His greatness and His glory. Is it thus in christendom? Far from it. Religious men like show. Their vestments are made to this end. It is the same with women in christendom but, in the temple, women have the hidden man of the heart, which gives them no desire to appear like the world. With their two other wings, the seraphim fly. They are ready to continue the service of the temple.
Immediately Isaiah sees this wonderful vision, he says, "Woe unto me!". That is too wonderful for me to enter into; I would like to but I cannot.
{154}
"I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips -- for mine eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of hosts." Then one of the seraphim moves towards the altar, uses tongs to take a glowing coal from off the altar and brings it in his hand. Think of a hand which can carry a glowing coal! Fire represents the holiness of God; "For also our God is a consuming fire" (@Hebrews 12: 29). The seraph can hold a glowing coal in his hand. His hand is holy; the fire will not burn it. In the temple, we must lift up holy hands in accord with the holiness of God.
The seraph *flies* towards Isaiah; it is an urgent matter. He wants to liberate Isaiah so that he can take part in the service of the temple. That is what we should want to do and the matter is urgent. The temple is nearly completed and the day for having part in this service is almost upon us. So the seraph flies towards him and touches his mouth with the burning coal. His lips are purified by the fire of the altar in such a way that he can speak. Think of the fire on the altar! Think of all that Jesus suffered in regard of sin! Isaiah had forgotten the purifying efficacy of this fire. Christendom rejects it; the sacrificial work of Christ has been abandoned. But the lips
{155}
of Isaiah are purified by it and he says, "Here am I; send me." He says, 'I am now ready to take my part in service'. We desire that everyone here should form part of the train which must fill the temple. The whole temple will be filled by this train. What is this train? You and I, if we form part of it. Every brother, every sister is a part of the train of the wonderful robe of the King, of Jehovah of hosts. The temple of God is a living edifice. The house of God is a spiritual house composed of living stones. Each of them forms part of the train which fills the temple.
I have read the last chapter of the epistle to the Romans to give us a summary of the train, or at least part of the train, because it encompasses the whole Christian period. Let us look at some beautiful pieces of the train. The apostle had worked in the epistle to the Romans to prepare the train. What elements he had to face up to at the beginning, elements marked by all kinds of impurities! "Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit; asps¬ poison is under their lips -- whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; swift their feet to shed blood;
{156}
ruin and misery are in their ways, and way of peace they have not known" (@Romans 3:13-17). But he applies himself to the preparation of the train, material for the temple. He presents Christ as "a mercy seat through faith in his blood" (@Romans 3: 25). He shows man's ruin and includes all men in divine mercy. He teaches them to recognise their leprous condition by nature, so that they cry, "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me out of this body of death?" (@Romans 7: 24). He shows how God has given the Holy Spirit to the believer who loves Christ and is united to Him. That is the source of everything -- every Christian is united to Jesus. Jesus wants to support him and satisfy his heart -- "to be to another ... in order that we might bear fruit to God" (@Romans 7: 4). Such are those who have received the Holy Spirit. "For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of death" (@Romans 8: 2). In chapter 12, Paul exhorts believers to present their bodies "a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God", which is their intelligent service. He leads us in this way to the train; all who form part of it have followed this way.
Now, in the last chapter, he comes to the train. "Phoebe, our sister" --
{157}
what a magnificent part of the train. She was "minister of the assembly which is in Cenchrea". The apostle and others had appreciated her service towards the assembly which is in Cenchrea. She had learned to serve the local assembly, the temple of God in Cenchrea. That is where we begin, if we begin at all. We begin where God has placed us, in Valence or elsewhere. It is there where we have to serve, instead of living to ourselves. Phoebe lived for God and for the assembly in the place where she lived. She came to the assistance of many; she "has been a helper of many, and of myself", says the apostle.
"Salute Prisca and Aquila, my fellow-workmen in Christ Jesus"; this is a wonderful couple, another beautiful part of the train! Prisca is mentioned first. When it was a matter of instructing Apollos, Aquila came first. When it is a question of sacrifice, Prisca comes first. Many of our sisters are ahead in this; they often make more sacrifices than brothers. "Salute Prisca and Aquila, my fellow-workmen in Christ Jesus, who for my life staked their own neck". The whole temple takes pleasure in Prisca and Aquila, "to whom not *I* only am thankful, but
{158}
also all the assemblies of the nations". What a part of the train which is going to fill the temple!
"Salute Epaenetus, my beloved, who is the first-fruits of Asia for Christ." The Hiram of the New Testament considers these materials. He says, 'Here is the first-fruits, something which is for Christ, which is like Him; that can be included in the train'. What is for Christ is for the temple and must fill it.
"Salute Maria, who laboured much for you". It is very humbling for brothers to see how often sisters are mentioned. The apostle is not mistaken; he is considering material for the temple. "Salute Maria"; she worked hard at bringing wood from the mountain for the temple.
"Salute Andronicus and Junias, my kinsmen and fellow-captives, who are of note among the apostles". Paul is looking at yet other materials. He says, 'They are my kinsmen, they resemble me, they are related to me'. 'They are my fellow-captives', ready to go into captivity for this great work, if that is necessary. They are "of note among the apostles"; he can give a name to these two, a name among the
{159}
apostles. We are not told what this name is but it has its place in the temple.
We cannot dwell on them all. Some are simply named. That is the case with many of us; there is nothing particularly prominent but the Lord knows us and sees the work in us. Everything enters into the train and appears in the temple.
"Salute Rufus, chosen in the Lord". He was marked out wonderfully. The apostle says, 'I can see the red' (Rufus means red). It is not the red of Babylon but of the rams¬ skins dyed red. He is "chosen in the Lord"; he is a devoted and chosen man. Paul looks at this element and says, 'I accept it'.
"Salute one another with a holy kiss". He wishes to clothe all the saints with the beauty of divine love, to cover them with a holy love. We must take account of this. Are our salutations, our affections holy? It speaks of "love out of a pure heart" (@1 Timothy 1: 5). Much gold is needed for the temple and gold represents divine love in the saints.
Then we come to verse 17. There the apostle has to set out a warning about materials which will attempt to infiltrate the
{160}
train. He speaks about such who "serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly". Such features must be removed from the temple. No activity that seeks to promote our own interests in the things of God has any place in the assembly. The apostle warns the Romans to be on guard against that. They "serve not our Lord Christ". All true work in the temple is to serve Him. Those who are spoken of here serve their own interests. This is the root of all local troubles; something is sought for self instead of for the Lord Christ. We must beware of this, not only in others but in ourselves. It is not enough that I condemn it in someone else, I can be very culpable of something that another may do. We have to arrive at this. Some evil that another may do, I can do also. It speaks here of certain persons who serve their own belly and I must not say that I would be incapable of that. When, in allusion to the traitor, the Lord says, "one of you shall deliver me up", each of the disciples says, "Is it *I*, Lord?" (@Matthew 26: 22). John says, 'Is it I?' He does not say that he would be incapable of it.
{161}
Peter, the first of the apostles, the prominent brother in the meeting, says, 'Is it I?' James says, 'Is it I?' and so all the others. Paul tells us to keep ourselves from this element which seeks its own interests. It harms the temple, or rather, it harms our present enjoyment of the temple.
"But the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly." What a wonderful declaration! "The God of peace shall bruise Satan under *your* feet shortly". If we continue in this path, Satan will shortly be put under *our* feet. It is the way of victory -- Satan under the feet of the saints. The saints have wonderful sandals like those of Jesus. John speaks about Jesus¬ sandal and says that he was not worthy to unloose its thong. May we genuinely seek to walk as he walked. Satan will soon be bruised under feet such as these. May we be given to continue until that day!
The apostle now seems to return to the train, not at Rome but elsewhere. "Timotheus, my fellow-workman" -- what a man Timothy was! The apostle could say of him, "For I have no one like-minded who will care with genuine feeling how ye get on" (@Philippians 2: 20). Timothy did not think
{162}
of himself -- he was like-minded with Paul.
"I Tertius, who have written this epistle". Perhaps we do not sufficiently appreciate this part of service. Tertius brought his contribution to the train. Brothers and sisters who attend to written ministry do a great work and the apostle recognises that here.
Here is another part of the train. "Gaius, my host and of the whole assembly, salutes you". We have here one of the most beautiful features of the train. John appreciates Gaius too -- he says, "Beloved, I desire that in all things thou shouldest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospers" (@3 John 3). Hospitality is a great feature of the temple. It is of God; God says, 'It is necessary "that my house may be filled"' (@Luke 14: 23). "Blessed are they that dwell in thy house -- they will be constantly praising thee!" (@Psalm 84: 4). "They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house" (@Psalm 36: 8). The Lord did not have a house but He had a guest-chamber. "Where is the guest-chamber where I may eat the passover with my disciples?" (@Luke 22: 11). He wants to fill His guest-chamber with His disciples and, when they are there, he says, "Take". Gaius was marked by this hospitality and he forms part of the train.
{163}
"Erastus, the steward of the city, salutes you". There is nothing more important today than administration; it is part of the divine work. An administrator holds nothing as his own; he administers goods which are entrusted to him. What is required of an administrator is that he should be faithful. This is essential, otherwise the administrator is a thief. Erastus was not a thief. Consider the first administrator that we find in the Scriptures -- it is Eliezer, the steward of Abraham's house. Abraham can confide in Eliezer. Eliezer takes the camels, the silver, the gold, Abraham's garments; he will not steal anything. He uses them for Abraham and, according to his instructions, goes to find Rebecca for Isaac. On his return, he can give a faithful account. Such is Erastus; he also can form part of the train.
The last verses of the chapter show us what the apostle has in view. He leads us to the revelation of the mystery. What is it? It is the body of Christ, "Christ in you the hope of glory" (@Colossians 1: 27). That is the mystery. God is preparing a vessel to express Christ. The train which fills the temple is the body of Christ. As he thinks of it, the apostle is filled with worship. It is, "according to commandment of the eternal God" that
{164}
the mystery has been revealed. Thanks be to God that the light of the mystery is known in our days.
All this emerges from Isaiah's vision and appears in "the year of the death of king Uzziah". We have to accept the end of this man. Divine things must not be approached by human intelligence but by the Spirit, in priestly conditions and in holiness. That is coming to light in our days. There are those who have come to this particular year and have received a wonderful vision of the greatness of God and of Christ, of the glory of His temple and the train which fills it. Then there is the power for us to enter by means of the glowing coal. This is a reality for many saints and the Lord desires that we should be more occupied with it, so that we should be able to take our place in the train for the praise of God.
May the Lord encourage us all in this way! In holy judgment of sin, may we listen to the seraphim saying to one another, "Holy, holy, holy".
{165}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD - FIFTH READING
@2 Chronicles 3
W.J.H. This chapter and the following one are about building. In the previous chapters, we have seen the kinds of material which Solomon used, who brought them to him and from where he took them. We now come to the building itself. The first great question is to know where the foundation will be, what will support this wonderful edifice. If there is no suitable foundation, sooner or later the house will collapse. Soon God is going to shake all that can be shaken but the temple of God will not be shaken because the foundation on which it is established is according to God. The name 'Moriah' means 'Shown by God'. God has shown the place where the house is to be built.
M. Is it the same Mount Moriah that we have in @Genesis 22?
W.J.H. Where Isaac was offered is "the land of Moriah" and the mountain is "one of the mountains which I will tell thee of." It is the same place which David bought from Ornan the Jebusite, where he
{166}
offered sacrifices when the sword of the destroying angel was returned to its sheath. It is undoubtedly an allusion to Calvary. The work accomplished at Calvary constitutes the foundation of the house of God. God said to Abraham, "because thou hast done this ... I will richly bless thee ... and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth bless themselves" (@Genesis 22:16-18). The blessing of the whole earth was founded on the sacrifice of Isaac. The cessation of the plague in David's day was based on the sacrifice which David offered. He also says, 'The foundation of the house of God is here' and he paid the full price to acquire this ground.
M. Two expressions are used. It says, "the place which David had prepared" and "Solomon's foundation".
W.J.H. David did not only buy Ornan's territory but also "the place" so as to ensure a vast way of access to the house, just as Abraham had bought the field as well as the cave of Machpelah in order to ensure access.
M. It is the place where the destroying angel stood.
W.J.H. Calvary is where the destroying angel returned his sword to its sheath. It says David "was afraid
{167}
because of the sword of the angel of Jehovah" (@1 Chronicles 21: 30). If we wish to be sheltered from the sword of the angel, we have to understand what Calvary means. This sword will find anyone who places himself on other ground. It is what this world is going to discover soon, to its loss. In the house of God, the building must be in harmony with the foundation.
M. What is the foundation?
W.J.H. The apostle tells us, "For other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 3: 11). The whole building must be conformed to Him and nowhere do we learn to recognise this better than at the cross.
Rem. We never forget the foundation.
W.J.H. Men's cities don't have any. Certainly neither Paris nor London have any foundation. Abraham knew that all cities would disappear. But the house of God has a wonderful foundation, an eternal foundation, Jesus Christ.
Rem. It says of Abraham that he "waited for the city which has foundations" (@Hebrews 11: 10).
W.J.H. He had heard of a whole world which had disappeared for lack of foundations.
{168}
He lived around the time when Babel came to an end because it had no foundations. He saw Sodom and Gomorrah disappear -- he climbed up the hill and saw the smoke which went up from the land. He waited for a city which has foundations. That is what we have here, the foundations of the temple of God and all its surrounding land.
Rem. In Ephesians, we read that the apostles and prophets are the foundation and that Jesus Christ is the corner-stone.
W.J.H. That is another aspect of the matter. In Corinthians, Christ is the foundation; in Ephesians, He is the corner-stone -- "Jesus Christ himself being the corner-stone" (@Ephesians 2: 20), which shows that from the foundation to the completion everything must be conformed to Christ. It was so for the apostles and prophets; they could constitute the foundation.
P.N. When Peter replies, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God", do we have the only foundation on which the temple can be built?
W.J.H. Exactly. "On this rock I will build my assembly". Every stone incorporated into the building is of this rock. "Thou art Peter" means 'You are a piece of the rock.' Peter refers to this in his
{169}
epistle -- "yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house" (@1 Peter 2: 5). One is impressed by the fact that it is at Calvary that we learn to know, in its fulness, the character of Jesus Christ. If you wish to see the finest gold, look at Calvary. If you wish to find the source of pure silver, you will find it at Calvary. If you desire to understand what bronze and iron are, you can do so at Calvary. If you want to see a real cedar or a cypress, it is at Calvary that they can be seen. If you wish to see purple or crimson or blue, look at Calvary. If you wish to see all the colours of precious stones, they shine at Calvary. We must go there if we desire to have a part in this house. It is there that the foundation is seen.
When we come to the construction of the temple, the Spirit of God shows clearly that it is made up of four distinct parts. There is the outer court with its wall, the porch inside the enclosure, the great house which is the holy place and, finally, the holy of holies. It is for each of us to find how far we can penetrate. If we are believers, we can all enter the court. If not,
{170}
we are still poor beggars of this world and beggars cannot enter the temple. We cannot appear empty before God but must bring a sacrifice. The object of the work of God in us is to make us capable of penetration into the holy of holies. We would do well to examine the extent to which we really have liberty to penetrate.
M. What does the court represent?
W.J.H. Anyone who was of the people of God could enter it. Only a priest could enter the holy place and only the high priest could enter the holy of holies. However, all the children of Israel could enter the court to contemplate the altar and look at the sea and the lavers. Every Christian can do that. In chapter 3 of the Acts, there was a poor beggar at the gate; he had not even got as far as the court but he saw the two pillars, Peter and John. These two pillars, Jachin and Boaz, are linked by chains and adorned with pomegranates. Peter represents the truth of the kingdom which establishes us (Jachin means 'He will establish'). John represents divine love, which is strength (Boaz means 'In Him is strength'). This man ceases to be a beggar -- he becomes a worshipper of
{171}
God and he enters Solomon's portico, holding Peter and John by the hand, "walking, and leaping, and praising God."
Ques. You said that any of the people of God could enter the court and only the priest could enter the house. Who could enter the porch?
W.J.H. I suppose that everyone who was in accord with the gold could enter, because the porch was covered with gold. Everyone with affection for Christ can enter the porch. The Spirit of God mentions only its dimensions and the fact that it was covered with gold.
Rem. After the healing of the lame man, all the people ran to the portico called Solomon's and the apostle explained to them what had happened.
W.J.H. This man, holding Peter and John by the hand, had access to the porch. There is reference to this porch in John's gospel, when Christ was rejected and it says, "and it was winter" (@John 10: 22). If there is no affection for Christ, it is always winter, wherever you might be. Spiritually, there is the return of the cold season in Christendom. As men abandon Christ, the cold becomes terrible.
{172}
But in the true temple, among the people of God, the warmth becomes more intense.
Ques. Is this a suitable place for the preaching of the gospel?
W.J.H. It is a suitable place for warming up the saints. The gospel meeting takes place at the gate of the temple called Beautiful. This is where Peter and John brought the gospel to this man, at the Beautiful gate. This gate of the temple is made of bronze. Bronze is not thought of as beautiful, but it is. It is beautiful to see a repenting sinner. He comes to the bronze gate; he can enter the court, look at the altar and make use of the great sea. He approaches God.
Ques. Were strangers not permitted to enter the court?
W.J.H. They have to become Israelites to enter it. When a man is converted, he becomes an Israelite. The epistle to the Galatians speaks of "the Israel of God". Isn't Saul of Tarsus an example? He never approached the house of God before he was converted. He would have acted only to destroy it, which could never happen in spite of his relentless efforts. But from his conversion onwards, he has the liberty to associate with the saints. Ananias thought it
{173}
impossible that the Lord could convert such a man. His reply assumed that the Lord was mistaken -- "I have heard from many concerning this man" (@Acts 9: 13). But the Lord says, 'I have chosen him; he will be invaluable for the building'. So Ananias comes to him saying, "Saul, brother". This is how we salute one another in the court.
We then come to the great house. It is a wonderful place. Can we enter there, dear brethren? "And the greater house he boarded with cypress-wood, which he overlaid with fine gold, and set on it palm-trees and chains. And he overlaid the house with precious stones for beauty; and the gold was gold of Parvaim. And he covered the house, the beams, the threshold, and its walls, and its doors with gold, and engraved cherubim on the walls." What a magnificent house! The human mind has never imagined a house like it. Can we enter there, dear brethren? In the book of Kings, it says that the two folding-doors of this house were of cypress-wood. Only those in the enjoyment of the freshness of spiritual life can enter this house. Those who find direction from creeds, catechisms, or by a ministry which is a hundred
{174}
years old, do not enter. This door is for those who live in freshness. It is a cypress-wood door. The cypress is an evergreen; it has its roots in the river of God, which, according to the Scriptures, is always flowing. We have no hope of entering unless we live in freshness with God, unless we live by the Holy Spirit in our souls. So this door puts us to the test. It is the same with the court -- no one can enter without self-judgment; otherwise the bronze gate will not open. No one can pass through the door of this great house without his soul being in life.
P.N. Are these the features which we find in the overcomer in Revelation? "He that overcomes, him will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more at all out" (@Revelation 3: 12).
W.J.H. Before that it says, "I have set before thee an opened door". The assembly at Philadelphia is living, at Sardis it is dead and Laodicea is worse than dead. The Lord says to it, "I would thou wert cold or hot." Philadelphia is living. The Lord opens the door to it and no one can close it. Dear brethren, let us ask ourselves this question, 'Can we enter this second door', or are we
{175}
content with what is in Christendom, with what is only historic? I think that we have to face up to this question. Many of us are feeding only on facts but it is a matter here of a living house, a living door and living worshippers, without which the door is closed. But when we enter the house, if we are able to enter, what a view! The walls are covered with precious stones, "onyx stones ... glistering stones, and of divers colours" (@1 Chronicles 29: 2). David had prepared them. There are diamonds; you find jasper, emerald, ruby, amethyst, sapphire -- the walls are covered with them.
L.P.N. What do these stones represent?
W.J.H. Rays of glory, coming from Christ and which have penetrated into a human heart. Each precious stone has its brilliance from the sun. The rays of the sun have entered so powerfully that the stone has absorbed them so as to keep them for ever. The sapphire may be only a small stone but it has absorbed the blue of the sky and it will never ever lose it. A little of this blue may be seen in a flower or on a butterfly, but it is there for only a few hours. The blue of the sapphire will never disappear. It is
{176}
the same with the red of the ruby, the violet of the amethyst and the transparency of the diamond. The walls are completely covered with these stones, each speaking of some feature of Christ.
L.P.N. They are not in themselves light sources, but they retain the light which they receive.
W.J.H. What Christian could say that he himself is the source of the light that is in him? Peter and John said, "why do ye gaze on us ... ?" You see this beautiful light shining. It does not come from us but from Jesus of Nazareth, whom the world has scorned. It is not our holiness or our power. We have received these from Christ; He is the source of them. How fine it is to move round this house and to look at these precious stones. It says that they are "for beauty". God loves what is beautiful. "He hath made everything beautiful in its time" (@Ecclesiastes 3: 11). Do you think that His dwelling place will not be beautiful? David says it "must be exceeding great in fame and in beauty in all lands" (@1 Chronicles 22: 5). All the nations are to hear of its fame and its beauty.
"And he covered the house, the beams, the threshold, and its walls, and its doors with gold, and
{177}
engraved cherubim on the walls." The cherubim are engraved on the gold; that is why we must have meetings for discipline. If anyone introduces what is unholy, the cherubim become active. They do not admit anything which might be out of accord with God. They are in the saints themselves. It is beautiful to see in the saints the cherubim watching diligently, so that nothing should be admitted into this house which might dishonour God or Jesus. Peter says, "For the time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come" (@1 Peter 4: 17).
Then we have the most holy place. One feels that he knows little of the most holy place. It corresponds to the immediate presence of God and Christ. There, once again, there is a door. It is not possible to enter without passing through a third door and it is for this reason that we rarely enter. This door is made of olive wood, as we see in the book of Kings. The door which separates the holy place from the most holy place is made of olive wood, which means that only spiritual persons can pass through it. But if we enter, we never forget it. In contemplating the ark, that is -- Christ in the presence of God -- not in the way we know
{178}
Him at Calvary, "without the gate", but as He can be known in the very presence of God -- in contemplating this ark, above which are the two cherubim with their four wings stretching from one wall to the other, each of five cubits, and touching one another (no one can touch the ark; it is under the wings of the cherubim and there is nothing between their wings), we can only stand and worship.
I think that we should pay more attention to these three doors, with a desire to enter by them into the temple. Certain brethren think that there is a door of gold at the entry to the court. They say, 'Let us love one another and let everyone in'. But God has placed a bronze door at the entrance. We must judge sin as God judges it, before being able to enter even the court, where we can enjoy fellowship with one another. But it is another completely different exercise to be in accord with the cypress-wood door. What tends to weaken the meetings of the saints is formality; everything is externally correct. But we have to ask ourselves, 'Are we living?' Is the presence of the Holy Spirit such a
{179}
reality that we can enter by this door into the great house? If we take this way, we shall soon arrive at the olive-wood door, where true spirituality allows us to enter the presence of God.
M. It has been remarked that only the high priest could enter the most holy place but it is now a question of our entrance. I wonder if it is only as associated and identified with Christ that we can enter there.
W.J.H. The way of the holy places had not then been made manifest. But now the apostle says, "Having therefore, brethren, boldness for entering into the holy of holies by the blood of Jesus, the new and living way..." (@Hebrews 10: 19). It is a matter of being in accord with the doors.
M. We can enter.
W.J.H. If we are in harmony with the doors but not otherwise.
P.N. Would you say a few words about the nails mentioned in connection with the most holy place?
W.J.H. There are no iron nails there; these are for the exterior. What holds everything together in the most holy place is divine love, the nails of gold. It speaks
{180}
elsewhere of a large quantity of iron nails but here the nails are of gold -- "being united together in love" (@Colossians 2: 2). These are the gold nails.
The veil was hung between the great house and the most holy place. Passing from one place to the other, the veil which Solomon made is seen. We always remember that we have access by virtue of the fact that Jesus is a man. He is always a man; all the glory of His humanity always subsists there -- the blue, the purple and the scarlet in the veil. Certain Christians think that Jesus has left His humanity but this is not so. He still has His body, a body of glory.
{181}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD - SIXTH READING
@2 Chronicles 4:1-6
W.J.H. Now we have chapter 4 before us, which would seem to show us what was in the court, the different utensils which were there. All serve to prepare us for what is beyond it. Very few Christians truly accept that the door of the court is made of bronze.
M. Most of the utensils which we find in the court are made of bronze.
W.J.H. It is very exercising for young people to knock at the door of the court and to find that it is made of bronze. Before allowing them to enter, the doorkeepers will want to know if they are like the door, that is, if they have judged sin in the light of God's judgment of it. Bronze represents what can endure fire.
M. Do you say that because bronze was the metal used for the altar?
W.J.H. Yes, the altar where the fire fell on the sacrifice was made of bronze. The serpent lifted up on a pole to carry the judgment was made of brass; God had said to
{182}
Moses to make a serpent of brass. It is worth presenting oneself at this door. Just now, I am speaking particularly to the young. At the house, it is worth examining our lives to see if children are subject to parents. It is worth examining our dress, the books we read, the friends we cultivate, in order to have access to this wonderful court. The young think that the brethren should show them love and to pass over these things but they cannot do this in the presence of this door, since this would be to carry defilement into God's court.
M. You mean that no concession is possible in respect of this door.
W.J.H. There is absolutely *none*. This door is made of bronze; there is no mention of the involvement even of wood in its construction. We have passed through exercises too deep to be making concessions; we have had to refuse sisters whose hair was cut. In Corinthians, it says that it is dishonouring for a woman to have cut hair. We cannot allow entry to the court to persons in a dishonouring condition.
P.N. We must be good doorkeepers.
W.J.H. The doorkeepers¬ service is very
{183}
important. There were thousands of doorkeepers. If we allow entry to a brother simply because he is rich and well taught, we shall have defilement in the court. Here is what you find in the court -- the altar, the brazen sea and the lavers. One enters the court when one is received into fellowship. If we understood it better, we would not hesitate to present ourselves at this door. The psalmist said, "For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand" (@Psalm 84: 10); he preferred to live for one day in these courts than for a thousand elsewhere.
M. Would you say something about the altar? It is much larger than the one in the tabernacle.
W.J.H. The altar in the holy place is for incense and is made of gold. The one outside, in the court, is for the sacrifices and, consequently, must be larger. No one except Christ has much incense. It would be something to be desired to have more but we have to admit that we do not have much. Brothers who pray publicly for almost half an hour certainly do not have enough incense for such a long time. The altar of incense is not large; the utensils employed there are the cups and not the bowls. If we were to remember
{184}
that even a prince offered only a cup full of incense that would put an end to long public prayers. Each brother and each sister has an appreciation of Christ as the burnt-offering, the sacrifice of peace-offering or the oblation and, in certain ways, the sin-offering and the trespass offering. A large altar is needed for these sacrifices. Those who are in fellowship bring them. Every person who enters by this door comes bringing a sacrifice. We must not appear empty. We would have good meetings on Lord's Day morning if we were to take this on spiritually.
C.R. Is there a difference between this door and self-judgment?
W.J.H. "But let a man prove himself, and thus eat of the bread" (@1 Corinthians 11: 28). He judges in himself what is not in accord with the holiness of God. Think of twenty brothers and sisters in Valence, all walking in self-judgment, who meet in the court in order to offer to God their appreciation of Christ on the brazen altar. We would have wonderful meetings and wonderful collections. Sisters would have their part there. "But of doing good and communicating of your substance be not forgetful, for with such sacrifices
{185}
God is well pleased" (@Hebrews 13: 16). All that has its place on the altar. God places His altar in the middle of the court, where everyone in fellowship can see it and bring something to it, as did the widow with her two mites.
M. Do the sacrifices brought to the brazen altar correspond to our tributes of praise at the breaking of bread?
W.J.H. Yes and also what is put into the collection. These two kinds of sacrifice are brought to this altar. The apostle said to the Philippians that what they had sent was "an odour of sweet savour, an acceptable sacrifice, agreeable to God" (@Philippians 4: 18). That was offered on this altar, as well as the sacrifices of praise and the sacrifices of thanksgiving of which the Scriptures speak. We would surely desire to offer these sacrifices. Paul received the collection but it was offered primarily to God. The widow put her two mites into the treasury of God. She was not concerned with what would be done with them; she gave them to God. That is how we act in regard of the collection.
M. In relation to this altar, you have spoken about having an appreciation of the sin offering. Does this have a place at the breaking of bread?
{186}
W.J.H. In Matthew and Mark, the passover, which involves the matter of sin and the judgment of God, is almost linked to the supper. In Mark it says, "And *as they were eating*. Jesus, having taken bread ... broke it" (@Mark 14: 22). They had not really finished, so that a strict demarcation cannot be made. It is as they ate the passover that Jesus took the bread. The psalmist gives us an encouragement which applies to everyone here. He says, "Yea, the sparrow hath found a house, and the swallow a nest ... thine altars, O Jehovah of hosts" (@Psalm 84: 3). There is a place at the altar for the sparrow. A sparrow is not of great value; five are sold for two farthings. Small as we may be spiritually, if we pass through this door of bronze, there is a place for us at the altar. The swallow is a bird of passage, which leaves one country for another. Most of us have done the same; we have wandered. But how ever far away we may have been, if we just come to this door of bronze and judge ourselves, we can approach the altar.
I. Why is it difficult for some among us to judge ourselves and come to this door?
{187}
W.J.H. J.B.S. answered that question -- he said, 'The more we love Christ, the more we hate sin.' That is why it is difficult -- we do not love the Lord enough. A Christian who does not judge sin does not really love the Lord in his heart. Think what you are missing if you continue on this way. To be at God's altar is a wonderful privilege.
A.G. It is the same thought that made the psalmist say, "Search me, O God, and know my heart; prove me, and know my thoughts; And see if there be any grievous way in me; and lead me in the way everlasting" (@Psalm 139: 23, 24).
W.J.H. He wishes to enter by this door and he is ready to see his ways exposed before God, so that he should be able to come to where God is, to where the brethren are.
The second great element is the sea, the brazen sea. It held three thousand baths. It was for the priests in which to wash. Beneath it, there were three hundred oxen, "cast when it was cast". "And under it was the similitude of oxen, encompassing it round about, ten in a cubit enclosing the sea round about, two rows of oxen, cast when it was cast." It is a wonderful suggestion -- three hundred oxen,
{188}
made in a single casting with the sea. Its circumference was thirty cubits and there were ten oxen per cubit. It stood on twelve oxen which faced outwards -- "three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east". I believe that we are more indebted to this bronze sea than we think. It represents the patient service of Christ for our continual purification. The sea is for the washing of the priests. The Lord says to Peter, "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me" (@John 13: 8). No one can enter this wonderful edifice if he has not been washed by the Lord. It is not a matter of being washed from our sins but of the defilement which we contract in the world. After having laid aside His garments, the Lord girded Himself with a towel and patiently washed the feet of His disciples. It is a very great service and it has to continue. That is the thought presented by the three hundred oxen.
Ques. Does the ox suggest patience?
W.J.H. That is the important point. In Scripture, it is a matter of the work of the ox. It says, "much increase is by the strength of the ox" (@Proverbs 14: 4).
C.R. What is the thought relating
{189}
to the Lord's use of the towel with which He was girt to wipe the feet of the disciples?
W.J.H. He had consideration for their well-being in wiping their feet. Think of the Lord washing our feet! Peter says, "Thou shalt never wash my feet". He thought it too humble a service for the Lord. But the Lord says, 'You cannot enter this wonderful house if I do not wash you'. That is the great value, dear brethren, of reading the Scriptures, particularly in our homes and in reading meetings. The Lord is there to purify us patiently "by the washing of water by the word". These twelve oxen encourage you when you see them. It may be that you cannot see the three hundred down below but you can see the twelve. There are three who face north. Their faces look outward; they observe each brother and each sister coming from the north, from the place of tribulation and distress. The Lord knows how these things depress us and often defile us. These three oxen consider each one of those who come from the north in order to serve them patiently, to revive them and to purify them. Most of us know what it is to come from the north.
{190}
Rem. "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened" (@Matthew 11: 28).
W.J.H. Think of bereavement, illness, unemployment. How these things test us! The Lord patiently considers those who come from the north, to bring His refreshing and purifying word to their heart, in order to liberate them to enter and serve God, whatever the circumstances. Sometimes we hear a brother give thanks after having lost a member of his family and it is wonderful. I have heard a brother give thanks after six months of unemployment; his spirit was in contact with the Lord. It was not something natural.
Ques. What does the water refer to?
W.J.H. "The washing of water by the word" (@Ephesians 5: 26); this passage teaches us what this means. The Lord speaks to us, purifies us, refreshes us by His word; that is what this means. It is the objective of reading meetings. They are not for looking into certain subjects in the Scriptures but for serving one another patiently, so that we are purified and refreshed. Three, then, are turned towards the west; their eyes scan the west. This is very important for elderly brothers and sisters.
{191}
The west means the movement of the day towards its end. Old age approaches and little time remains to us. These oxen take account of these brothers and sisters in order to revive their spirit, to encourage them in their weakness and to liberate their hearts for the service of God, even although they are old. It is a very great service.
J.M. Without this service, elderly brothers and sisters would be unable to continue to the end.
W.J.H. They would grow weary. Anna did not leave the temple, although she was nearly a hundred years old.
Then there are three which face the south. They observe all those who are prospering, whether materially or spiritually. These three oxen see the brethren who are prospering; these need help. If they are prospering in material things, they are in great danger. "Lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is Jehovah?" (@Proverbs 30: 9). These three oxen observe the brothers and sisters who come from the south and bring to their hearts the purifying efficacy of the word of God so that they are able, none the less, to serve God, even if coming from the south.
Rem. They would take account of the women "who ministered to him of their substance" (@Luke 8: 3).
{192}
W.J.H. That is very good. Gaius and Zacchaeus were also rich but their wealth did not prevent their entrance into the temple. The Lord looks on such brethren and helps them.
Then there are three facing the east. This is a word for the children, for those at the beginning of life. That is the meaning of the east, the place where the day begins. The Lord considers these children, these young boys and girls. He loves to serve them all patiently with a view to their participation in the service of God. It is not simply that they should not go to hell; there is little said in the Scriptures about hell for that matter. These young boys and girls are to enter into the temple.
L.P.N. In summary, whatever our situation or age, we always need to be supported and it is good to be aware of this.
W.J.H. The Lord puts Himself at our disposal with all the patience typified by the oxen. The Lord loves to see the children in the temple. Think of Samuel! It says that he "lay in the temple" and Jehovah called him three times saying, "Samuel, Samuel" but Samuel did not recognise the voice. Think of Jehovah's patience towards Samuel! That should
{193}
encourage the young people to move forward and to pass through this door.
P.N. Does the fact that there are twelve oxen convey the idea of God's administration in relation to the things we are considering? Each of these four groups consists of three oxen. Does this show what is complete?
W.J.H. Twelve expresses perfect administration. Three represents a complete testimony to the fact that the Lord considers children, rich brethren, elderly brothers and sisters and those in pain and sorrow in order to serve all, so that they can serve God. It is a wonderful day when a young person begins to give thanks. When the Lord was in the temple down here, the children cried out saying, "Hosanna to the son of David". It was not a long thanksgiving. The Pharisees said to Him, "Hearest thou what these say?" Jesus replied, "Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise" (@Matthew 21: 16). The Lord had heard. I think that the older brethren need to remember that the Lord wants to hear the young.
{194}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD - SEVENTH READING
@2 Chronicles 4:6-11
W.J.H. I recall the words of the psalmist, to which there was reference last evening -- "For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand" (@Psalm 84: 10). He said, "My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of Jehovah" (verse 2), such was his appreciation of these courts. We have considered a little the altar and the sea. This morning, I thought we might consider the ten lavers, the ten lamps and the ten tables; then we might look at where these articles of bronze were made. They are so numerous that their weight is not known. I think that, even in eternity, we will never know the weight; it says that "the weight of the bronze was not ascertained" (verse 18).
Rem. I suppose that we often feel the need of these ten lavers.
M. The sea was for the washing of the priests and the
{195}
lavers for the washing of the offerings.
W.J.H. The sea was for the persons, for the priests, so that they might wash in it. Its capacity was three thousand baths; the sea was great, for we all have to be washed. On the other hand, most of us find that when we bring an offering we must wash it, because every offering which we bring needs to be washed.
M. Would you develop that a little?
W.J.H. Do you never find impure motives in your heart, when you stand up to pray or to give thanks? It is important to wash your offering. When a brother puts something into the collection, whether it be little or much, he generally has to wash his gift. When a sister devotes herself at home to the service of the Lord, I am sure that she acknowledges that this service has to be washed. As long as we are down here, the flesh is in us and, if an offering is not cleared of carnal elements, it is not pure.
M. How is this purification carried out?
W.J.H. I think that what puts an end to this order of things is some soul contact with the death of Christ. John says that in His death, he came "by water and blood". The blood is for remission but
{196}
the water is for purification. There is a wonderful power of purification in the death of Christ, as wonderful as the power of forgiveness.
L.P.N. If we had a sufficient appreciation of Christ, we would offer joyfully, with a perfect heart.
W.J.H. And with purity. It speaks in @1 Peter 1: 22 of love "out of a pure heart". God knows that we need to have these ten lavers while we are down here in this scene of responsibility. We must have all ten of them.
A.B. Why are there ten of them?
W.J.H. Because we are still on the earth; it is the place of our responsibilities. There are no lavers in heaven, because there is no defilement there. There are no lavers in chapter 5 of Revelation; the service of God proceeds without lavers. But down here we need to have the lavers and we must use them.
A.B. But why the number ten?
W.J.H. In the Scriptures, ten represents human responsibility. We have ten fingers and ten toes. This responsibility is clearly seen in the ten commandments.
A.G. Speaking of responsibility, can the verse in
{197}
Philippians be connected with what you are saying -- "work out your own salvation with fear and trembling" (@Philippians 2: 12).
W.J.H. That is the idea; only here there is particular reference to that which we bring to God and which requires purification.
P.N. Would the purification of our souls (@1 Peter 1: 22) relate to the sea, and would loving one another out of a pure heart fervently result from use of the lavers?
W.J.H. Brotherly love is not offered to God; what you offer to God is love. Peter speaks of adding love to brotherly love (@2 Peter 1: 7). What produces the praises of the saints is love for God and for Christ.
M. Do you think that, practically, the priest washes in the sea before the breaking of bread and then, if there is a sacrifice to offer, this sacrifice also has to be washed? It is the continuation of self-judgment.
W.J.H. The epistle to the Hebrews presents the matter thus -- "sprinkled as to our hearts from a wicked conscience" (@Hebrews 10: 22). This is what is done at the bronze gate. "And washed as to our body
{198}
with pure water". This is what is done at the sea. We cannot enter the presence of God, the holy place and the most holy place, without an offering in our hands, an appreciation of Christ in our hearts, we love Him. We have some money to put into the collection and a brother has it in his heart to give a word, but it all needs to be washed, because the flesh is in us. Everything has a trace of the flesh. The lavers would remove this element.
M. It is what *we* are which needs to be purified by the water, so that the sacrifice is pure. The sacrifice in itself is pleasing to God.
W.J.H. The sacrifice is your appreciation of Christ and the love which is in your heart for Christ but, in most hearts, there are all sorts of other things -- a brother likes to be heard, to be known as one who gives generously, to be noticed. We know very well that these things are in our hearts and often in our sacrifices. But when we come to the death of Jesus and see the purity in which it is given, we purify ourselves from elements of this kind. That must continue all the time.
Rem. "The Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it, in order that he might
{199}
sanctify it, purifying it by the washing of water by the word" (@Ephesians 5: 25, 26).
W.J.H. That is a very good reference -- "purifying it by the washing of water by the word". Then there is the purification of the sacrifice, which is very important.
M. We must be watchful not to discourage persons who wish to bring something but who might fear that it has some impurity. This feeling might cause hesitation to bring what one has.
W.J.H. As seeing the lavers, one will be encouraged rather than discouraged, for God has provided ample means for the purification of our sacrifices. If you look to the right, there are five lavers and, equally to the left, there are five.
P.N. It is encouraging indeed to think that these lavers make it possible for us to bring something.
W.J.H. We must not keep our offerings. We come with them and we wash them. Why would we not wash them? We never deceive God, even although we may deceive others. We must *wash* them; God knows and He provides.
Rem. This obligation ought never to bring fear into our hearts.
{200}
W.J.H. It brings joy. God so appreciates our offerings that He has provided for their washing.
P.G. It is the same with the breaking of bread. It says, "But let a man prove himself", not to abstain, but to eat (@1 Corinthians 11: 28).
W.J.H. That takes place at the bronze door; it is self-judgment. We are speaking just now about the offerings.
Ques. Is there significance in the fact that there are five lavers to the right and five to the left?
W.J.H. Certainly. There is significance in all that God says. Every word in Scripture has great significance. We shall never reach the end of the Scriptures because God has put His breath there. We shall never be able to grasp its full depth. The right seems to me to refer to what is objective; it is a symbol of power. The left is what is weaker; it is the subjective side. We can think in this way of Christ according to what He is before God, apart from ourselves, and in the light of this we worship God, but our understanding must be purified. Then we can think of the work of God in the saints; this is the weaker side. It may be that we find pleasure in the saints
{201}
and that we would wish to praise God in relation to His work in them but purification is also necessary in this connection. The apostle has the right side in view when he worships God in the epistle to the Ephesians. "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" (@Ephesians 1: 3). At that moment he is not thinking even of the saints, he is thinking of the blessing which is found in God. That is the right side, the side of power. Later in the epistle to the Ephesians, he is at the left side, saying, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages. Amen" (@Ephesians 3: 21). He considers the work of God in the saints. Thoughts are purified in the lavers to the right and to the left. As on one side, so on the other, worship is holy, pleasing to God.
I. Nothing can be brought to God without its having been purified.
W.J.H. Until we are in heaven, I do not think that there is a single thing that we do which does not need to be purified. But God knows what we are. These ten lavers are there for our use.
A.B. Can what you are saying be connected
{202}
with this verse -- "Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatever ye do, do all things to God's glory" (@1 Corinthians 10: 31)?
W.J.H. For that to be true, much purification is needed. One sits down to a meal and has no other thought, in eating, than to do it to the glory of God. Every time you eat, every time you open your mouth, you have the glory of God in view. In all your actions, in all that you do, you have in view the glory of God. We now understand the necessity for the ten lavers, because, naturally, we are so selfish. Selfishness reigns in the human heart. This great sea is to help us as to our bodies and the lavers as to our sacrifices, so that they should be purified according to God. I think that, in the light of this, we can understand the depth of the words of the Lord, when He said to Peter, "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me" (@John 13: 8). Peter did not know what was in his own heart but the Lord knew and washed him.
I. What distinction do you make between "holiness becometh thy house" (@Psalm 93: 5) and the fact of our approach to it?
{203}
W.J.H. "Holiness becometh thy house, O Jehovah, for ever". It is always holy; it could not be otherwise, because it is the house of God. This is what we have to recognise as we approach. It is really the bronze door again. We never enter these courts without passing through this door. Otherwise we are robbers. He who "mounts up elsewhere, *he* is a thief and a robber" (@John 10: 1). In truth, there is no way other than the bronze door, that is, self-judgment. I am sure that we know a little of these exercises, secretly in our souls. No one can serve the Lord without knowing something of these things.
Rem. There needs to be a bronze door at the house of God.
W.J.H. "Holiness becometh thy house, O Jehovah, for ever". There is no allusion to any door in the new heavens and the new earth. Heaven will descend on the earth without doors, because sin will be excluded from it for ever. But in this scene of responsibility, we need to have doors and, particularly at the entrance, we need a bronze door.
"And he made ten candlesticks of gold according to the ordinance respecting them, and set them
{204}
in the temple, five on the right hand and five on the left." David's desire to go into the courts to see the golden candlesticks is understandable, since he had to do with the terrible conditions of darkness of this world. The prominent feature of darkness is hatred. "Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer" (@1 John 3: 15). David was hated without a cause by Saul and by those who were with him, that is, by the first man and by what belongs to him. The first man hated David and David felt it. He desired, if for only one day in the courts, to go into the temple where there are the golden candlesticks, the light of divine love, the light of heaven. We are here together for this reason. All the brethren love the candlesticks. We come to the temple to see the light shining there. We have reading meetings for the candlesticks to make the light of God shine in our hearts. There is always light in the temple; for us it is a matter of being able to go in. The candlesticks are not of bronze but of gold.
M. Why does it say that candlesticks were made "according to the ordinance respecting them".
W.J.H. You are asking an interesting question, since all the candlesticks,
{205}
according to the ordinance, highlight the great lamp-stand; their light is on the lamp-stand. That is the ordinance; you find it in the book of Exodus. The candlesticks shine on the lampstand and show it more clearly. The lamp-stand is Christ. All divine light shines on Christ, to make Christ greater to us, more radiant, more glorious. That is the ordinance respecting the candlesticks.
Rem. You mean that, in Exodus, there was a great candlestick and the lamps gave their light to this candlestick.
W.J.H. The object of all the light we can have, in readings or otherwise, is to enhance the glory of Christ to us. No brother or sister would ever miss a reading meeting if they understood that, unless, obviously, they were ill, in which case, they would pray. God might make a ray of light as to Christ to shine and, if we should miss it, it might not shine again. A ray of light has shone; tomorrow, there will be another ray.
P.N. You mean that if we miss one of these meetings, something will be lost for ever.
W.J.H. If, in the temple, a ray
{206}
of light has shone on Christ and we have missed it, how shall we recover it?
M. Christ is the light and the effect of these candlesticks is to show us a little more of His glory.
W.J.H. I remember when I was a child, that our readings were sometimes discussions on difficult points. Thanks be to God that they no longer have this character today, because the Lord has worked over a long period in relation to the temple and the brethren are exercised to be in accord with the temple.
Rem. "*Ye* are the light of the world" (@Matthew 5: 14).
W.J.H. First of all, the Lord says, "I am the light of the world"; that is the great lamp-stand. Then, "*Ye* are the light of the world", to draw the attention of others more clearly to the great light. These lamps are in the holy place. We have now taken one step further -- we have moved from the court into the holy place. The altar, the sea and the lavers are the main utensils of the court.
M. In the same way as in the court, with five lavers to the right and five to the left, there are also, in the temple, five candlesticks to the right and five to the left.
{207}
W.J.H. The five candlesticks to the right would suggest light according to God and according to Christ personally, light which God has caused to shine especially in these recent years. The five to the left would illuminate the place which belongs to the assembly in her relation to Christ, who is the head of the body, the assembly. The assembly has in view the exaltation of Christ, according as it says, "woman is man's glory" (@1 Corinthians 11: 7). A man who can hold the affections of a woman is greater than a man who is not married. So it says, "woman is man's glory". The lamps to the left take nothing away from Christ; rather, they add to His glory.
We might now look at what relates to the tables. "And he made ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five on the right hand and five on the left". They are "the tables whereon was the shewbread". The general thought of tables in Scripture is fellowship. Who would not wish to enjoy the fellowship of the saints? It is so much better than any other fellowship. There cannot be two fellowships. That is what the apostle establishes in the tenth chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians, before dealing with the subject of the
{208}
supper; this is also spoken about in @2 Corinthians 6:14-16. You cannot have fellowship with light and darkness. That cannot be and it has to be remembered. We have either light or darkness; we cannot have both. We cannot have fellowship with Christ and Beliar. Christ is the anointed man in whom there is everything that is precious. Beliar means 'worthless'. We cannot have fellowship with what is precious and with what is worthless at the same time. We cannot have fellowship with the temple of God and idols. The apostle says, 'You cannot have both'. Many Christians try to; also, they do not come to these ten tables. Brethren have to pay attention to this and to be watchful. Otherwise, they become angry and leave. There have been those who have tried to do what God says cannot be done. If we try it, we shall soon find ourselves out of fellowship; we shall lose contact with the tables. The desire of each of us is to remain in fellowship until the moment when the temple is on the point of completion. Think of what it would be to go out of fellowship at such a moment.
Rem. The exercise would be to keep the unity of the Spirit.
{209}
W.J.H. This would, doubtless, be the result. What is essential is to acknowledge what we cannot do. Christendom is full of people who try to do what is divinely impossible -- to link light and darkness, the temple of God with idols, and Christ with Beliar. That is impossible. However, it is attempted. Many Christians lose true fellowship; indeed, they have already lost it and we shall lose it too, if we try to combine light and darkness.
M. Would you say that one who tries to link Christ and Beliar will lose Christ and gain Beliar?
W.J.H. One will have what is worthless. What will be gained is the idolatry, which is extending its influence over the world with horrifying speed. One will have darkness. The realm of the beast, who is just about to appear, is full of darkness. Not the slightest ray of divine light is there. There are two sets of these tables, five to the right and five to the left. To the right, we have fellowship together according to God and according to Christ. What holy fellowship together is given to us in relation to the greatness of God and to the greatness of
{210}
Christ! These are the five tables to the right. Then the five to the left represent fellowship together in relation to the work of God in His people -- it is really the work of the Spirit, since the subjective side of the truth is the work of the Spirit. The objective side is related to God and Christ. The subjective side, which is also very important, relates to the work of the Spirit in the saints. Many Christians would be content with the five tables to the right; they are not interested in the five at the left. Why should account not be taken of them? I think that many Christians look only to the right, where there are five lavers, five lamps and five tables. Could you imagine that God had made a mistake in putting these sets of five on that side? Is the assembly nothing to Him? It is in the assembly that He will have glory unto all generations of the age of ages.
M. Would you say a few words on the shewbread?
W.J.H. The twelve loaves were on the tables, representing the complete thoughts of God as to His people. They were always before God and they are always before those who are in the temple in reality. Paul speaks of "our whole twelve tribes" (@Acts 26: 7). In his thoughts, there were never
{211}
less than twelve. There is no idea of sectarianism in the temple of God. The shewbread provides for that. For us there is "one loaf", whether at Corinth, at Loriol or at Sydney, "for we all partake of that one loaf" (@1 Corinthians 10: 17). In our thoughts, a single loaf is in view, the same loaf on each table. There is no local fellowship. When the apostle says, "The bread which *we* break" (@1 Corinthians 10: 16), it is not 'we' at Corinth. When he wrote that, Paul was not at Corinth; he was probably at Rome. It is still the bread which *we* break.
Ques. Do you connect the tables with the breaking of bread?
W.J.H. I connect the tables with the principle of fellowship, set out in @1 Corinthians 10. The idea of the shewbread is introduced more in chapter 11. Fellowship is necessary in order to have the supper. When the Corinthians were divided into sects, the apostle said, 'That is not the supper'. So, in the tenth chapter, the great subject is "the Lord's table", the table signifying fellowship. The disciples were seated at table, when the Lord instituted the supper in holy links of affection.
{212}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD - EIGHTH READING
@2 Chronicles 4:11-22
I should like to give a summary of what we have considered over these last four or five days. We have been occupied with what God is doing at the present time, with his building work. The heavens and the earth have been completed but the present work of God is not yet completed.
We mentioned what was in David's heart when he was a young boy. Later, he says, "Behold, we heard of it at Ephratah" (@Psalm 132: 6). That is where the life of David, son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, began. He says, 'We heard of the ark at Ephratah; "we found it in the fields of the wood". At that time the ark was treated with much indifference, but David said, "I will not give sleep to mine eyes, slumber to mine eyelids -- until I find out a place for Jehovah, habitations for the Mighty One of Jacob". This was the great objective of David's life. He told Solomon that, in his affliction, he had prepared materials (@1 Chronicles 22: 14).
{213}
Even when he was hunted as a partridge on the mountains, this great goal was always before him. It was to this end that he went to war. In each of his battles, what he had in view was to gather spoil for the house of God. It was the objective in view when he was on the throne. Before his reign was finished, he put Solomon on the throne and told him what was in his heart; he instructed him on how he would build the house. He said, "And behold, in my affliction I have prepared for the house of Jehovah a hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver; and of brass and iron without weight, for it is in abundance; and timber and stone have I prepared" (@1 Chronicles 22: 14). Then he added, "and thou shalt add to it". The builder in glory has every resource, all wisdom and the power of heaven. Christ is building this house. It says, "And Solomon purposed to build a house for the name of Jehovah" (@2 Chronicles 2: 1). No one can make him alter his decision. Thus he speaks to Hiram, a man who was ever a lover
{214}
of David. Whether David was in poverty, in rejection, hated, or glorious, Hiram always loved David. So Solomon requests materials from Hiram. He says, "Send me also cedar-trees, cypress-trees, and sandal-wood" (@2 Chronicles 2: 8). "And now send me a man skilful to work in gold, and in silver, and in bronze, and in iron, and in purple and crimson and blue" (verse 7). Hiram sends his servant, he is happy to send him and he sends him in a spirit of worship, saying, "Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel" (verse 12). He sends a man who can do all that Solomon can ask of him, and more. He is able to devise all sorts of things.
We have noticed that the place where the house is to be built has been determined. It is Mount Moriah, which God had indicated to Abraham (@Genesis 22: 2). Isaac was offered there. It was there that David presented a sacrifice, where the judgment of God stopped when the sword was stretched out and the holy sacrifice was accepted. It is Calvary. The foundation of God's building is at Calvary.
We then considered the building under construction -- the court with a door of bronze at its entrance and the door of gold
{215}
set up. We saw the great house, with its wonderful walls of gold covered with precious stones, and the holy of holies, into which the ark was to be placed, the wings of the cherubim spread out in the place where the presence of God was to be known. We saw the altar, which was to bear the sacrifices which Israel would present. We saw the great brazen sea, full of water so that all those offering sacrifices might be purified. The lavers for the cleansing of the sacrifices are also in this wonderful court. We saw the golden lamps lit in the temple and the tables with the shewbread.
We now come to the important consideration of the place where the utensils of brass were made. The number of these was never known and never will be known. No one can measure or enumerate the holy vessels, which will be for the eternal praise of God. Where are they made? "In the plain of the Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay-ground between Succoth and Zeredathah" (@2 Chronicles 4: 17). Where is this? Where are the plains of Jordan? We know them well -- they are here in Loriol, as in Paris or London, where man's sin is so great that God comes down to communicate what is to happen, as He said to Abraham, "I
{216}
will go down now, and see..." (@Genesis 18: 21). A cry rose up to heaven from these plains, the voice of man's wickedness. It is in just these plains that Hiram works. Lot had beheld them, but Abraham looked towards heaven. Lot saw the plains of Jordan. What a spectacle! They were well watered; it was a place of many pleasures. The rivers of the world's pleasures flowed there. These plains were as "the garden of Jehovah, like the land of Egypt" (@Genesis 13: 10). Oh, what confusion! It is the confusion that is found in the world, although it professes to have the Lord's name. In the world, dates are set from the birth of Christ, but it is "like the land of Egypt". What is Egypt? Egypt refuses God -- "Who is Jehovah, to whose voice I am to hearken ... ?" (@Exodus 5: 2). Egypt's resources are its own river; it does not receive rain from heaven. It is a country of frogs, gnats, corruption and darkness. The plains show what Egypt is. Lot beholds these plains; he goes there and lives there. Hiram works there, "in the clay-ground", that is, in the conditions of our lives here on earth. Elihu says, "I also am formed out of the clay" (@Job 33: 6); such is our earthly condition. "For
{217}
dust thou art; and unto dust shalt thou return." (@Genesis 3: 19). Hiram works in this clay, in the presence of man's wickedness, "between Succoth and Zeredathah".
What is Succoth? Succoth means booths or tents (@Genesis 33: 17); it is a temporary dwelling. We are here for only a short time. We have no permanent dwelling; only a 'booth' in which to pass the night. And what is Zeredathah? It is the place where "the waters which flowed down from above stood and rose up in a heap" (@Joshua 3: 16). It is the place where death waits to intervene; no one knows when the waters will return. It could be at any moment that you find yourself carried away by them. Zeredathah speaks to us of the presence of death. This is where we are in our earthly dwelling at this very moment, with evil all around us. Death is not far off. In these conditions, Hiram works to make vessels of bright brass for the temple of God. Soon these conditions will be left behind, what is of clay will be finished for ever. We will no longer have a tent but a "house which is from heaven" (@2 Corinthians 5: 2). Death will exist no more; the fire of God will have consumed that which
{218}
is spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified (@Revelation 11: 8). The judgment of God is soon going to destroy it all but from conditions such as these emerge vessels of bright brass, available for God's use, shining with holy beauty. There will be millions upon millions of such vessels. Neither their number nor their weight will ever be known.
Using servants, God is working in these conditions. May we take it to heart, dear brethren. We do not know how long may remain to us in these conditions. The years, the months, the days pass quickly and our lives fly past. Should we be wasting time in the pursuit of pleasures, money and the things of earth? The apostle speaks of the need to redeem time (@Ephesians 5: 16). Time is so precious! Present conditions should be used for the casting of brass. There is only one divinely prescribed mould in which the wisdom of Solomon can cast the utensils. You will notice that this is what Solomon does; he employs Hiram, as he can employ anyone. It is a matter of the choice of servants. With the resources of the kingdom and deploying all his wisdom, Solomon uses earthly circumstances of what
{219}
is temporary and overshadowed by death. With wonderful wisdom, the Lord forms these vessels of brass. He uses our earthly circumstances to prepare something that is eternal. Later, He will remove the vessel from the mould and have a completed vessel at his disposal.
Consider the vessel which He takes in the seventh chapter of the Acts. Christ is the true Solomon on the throne. Stephen looks into heaven and sees Jesus in glory. Down here are the plains of Jordan, where there is unleashed against Stephen the terrible wickedness of men, who gnash their teeth against him and stone him. This is Succoth, in the plains of Jordan. Stephen is in an earthly dwelling, made of clay. His sojourn down here is for only a short time; it is like a booth at Succoth. Zeredathah is near; the power of death is weighing down on him and is about to carry him away. Think of Solomon releasing this vessel from the clay-ground, a vessel of bright brass, a holy vessel. There is no mixture; it is a vessel of perfect beauty, suitable for the temple of God. When his spirit goes to be with the Lord Jesus, Stephen departs the earth and leaves behind him the plains of Jordan. He leaves behind Succoth and the waters of death. The Lord receives a vessel of bright brass,
{220}
precious as gold -- "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit" (@Acts 7: 59). What pleasure for the Lord to receive him! What a reception is provided by the true Solomon for such a vessel in the temple of God in heaven. In the Revelation it says that "the temple of God in the heaven was opened" (@Revelation 11: 19). Everything that is formed in this way belongs as much to heaven as to earth.
Other features are seen, no doubt, in Stephen. The temple is not made entirely of brass. The clay-ground is where the brass is cast. Cedar-wood is also used in the temple. Cedars grow on Lebanon on the earth but very close to heaven. Cypress and sandal-wood also grow on Lebanon. Stephen was like a cedar of Lebanon -- he was not of this world. The cedars of this world will be burned (@Numbers 19: 6); only ashes will remain. The glory of this world will end in this way. But Stephen was not a cedar of this kind; he lived in relation to heaven. There was not a cloud between him and heaven. Looking up, he beheld the heavens opened.
Stephen was evergreen, like a cypress of Lebanon. Even while he was being stoned, all the freshness and beauty of the cypress were still there, because his soul
{221}
was deriving its support from the river of God by the Spirit. He was like a tree planted by brooks of water, whose leaf fadeth not, even in the presence of the hatred of the heart of man.
Again, Stephen was like sandal-wood. He was familiar with the sandals of Jesus, whose footsteps he had followed. "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that announceth glad tidings, that publisheth peace" (@Isaiah 52: 7). Stephen had followed his Master and his movements were like those of Jesus. John says that we should walk as He walked (@1 John 2: 6). This is what Stephen did.
Pure gold was seen in him; this is love which corresponds to the love of God. There was not a word of hatred in him, not even a threat. All that was heard from him in this connection were these words -- "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge" (@Acts 7: 60). How beautiful is this gold! How he expresses the character and glory of God!
Silver is also found there, since Stephen says, "Lord"; that is the silver, Jesus was always his Lord. Brass and iron were also in evidence. Stephen is strong; he was unshaken.
{222}
A genuinely royal character is seen in him, evidence of the purple. The Lord is making kings of us but Stephen had already reached this state. Purple is seen in him, as is scarlet, the conspicuous colour which cannot be hidden. The colour which marked Stephen has remained for two thousand years and the blue is also seen in him, the very character of heaven.
In other features, Stephen was a model of what the Lord was doing as to His own. It is beautiful to see his correspondence to the precious stones. What colours can be seen shining in him! The purple, the blue and the scarlet are there in a *permanent* way. That is the idea in the precious stones -- their colour is there for ever. Jasper is also evident, for nothing was hidden with Stephen; he was transparent.
I refer to all these things, dear brethren, to illustrate what God is doing. In Stephen, it is already finished. For us, it is not yet complete. It may be that, for some, it is almost complete. However it may be, the divine work continues with each one of us for as long as we are down here.
Then it says that Solomon made the golden altar. If we understand in
{223}
our hearts that these are great divine thoughts, that this is what God has been working out for two thousand years and is that into which we have been called to have part in His grace, then we feel moved to pray. We find the necessity of the golden altar. I wonder if we approach the golden altar often enough. This is a wonderful altar, made of cedar wood and covered with gold. It is Christ in his kingly glory, set apart for the glory of God, so that we should have a means of access to God. The holy incense is offered there -- the prayers of the saints rise from the golden altar. One would wish to set this exercise before each brother and sister -- do we approach this altar? It is not in the court, much less in the world. It is not an altar of earth, precious as the altar of earth is. The altar of stone is also of great importance and the brazen altar cannot be bypassed but the golden altar is the most important. It is opposite the veil in the holy place -- it is in the presence of Jesus in His humanity. It speaks to us of the blessed man who lived only for God -- He whose prayers were always at the golden altar -- He who taught us to pray. The disciples heard Him pray and they asked Him,
{224}
"Lord, teach us to pray" (@Luke 11: 1). He said to them, "Thus therefore pray *ye* -- Our Father who art in the heavens, let thy name be sanctified, let thy kingdom come, let thy will be done as in heaven so upon the earth" (@Matthew 6:9,10). That is incense. It is not simply a matter of our needs, our affairs, our health or our families. There is much more than that -- "...let thy name be sanctified"; it is the name of God. The Lord teaches us what incense is, what it is to pray at the altar of incense in the way in which He always did. What incense was there in @John 17. He lifts up His eyes to heaven and says, "Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee". It was not simply for His own glory as Man that He desired to be glorified but it was in order to glorify God. It is the same with all the prayers of Jesus. For these great thoughts to be real and living in us, we need to approach the golden altar and pray in relation to the glory of God and the glory of Christ. This was what was in Paul's heart. He had shown God's great thoughts to the Ephesians, that is, that God would be glorified "in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all
{225}
generations of the age of ages" (@Ephesians 3: 21) and that God will have all building so that it is fitted together and "increases to a holy temple in the Lord" (@Ephesians 2: 21). He also says, "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" (@Ephesians 3:14). For the realisation of this, he needs to approach the golden altar. The apostle is at the golden altar and he beholds the veil. He prays for these dear brethren and we need to pray more at the golden altar so that these great thoughts should have their place in the souls of those who compose the people of God today. There is nothing in Scripture that indicates that growth takes place in heaven. The size of the vessel is fixed in the clay-ground. When it is removed from the mould, it does not change. When God will have completed His work, "he will rest in his love; he will exult over thee with singing" (@Zephaniah 3: 17). As He considers all that He has wrought over the whole of this period and sees the beauty of Christ in His masterpiece -- His love known in every heart -- He will exult with singing. Think what this will be. We can understand that we shall sing the new and eternal song. The Lord Jesus sings too; "in the midst
{226}
of the assembly will I sing thy praises" (@Hebrews 2:12). But God will also exult with singing as He sees the product of His work.
May the Lord help us, dear brethren, to let these great thoughts penetrate our souls, so that we might be able to say with the apostle, "but one thing" (@Philippians 3: 13). We are often hindered by so many things! But he says, "but one thing -- forgetting the things that are behind, and stretching out to the things before, I pursue, looking towards the goal, for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus".
May it be the same with us, for the love of His name!
{227}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD - NINTH READING
@2 Chronicles 6:18-31
W.J.H. It is important to see that the house of God is not in heaven but on earth; it is the place where heaven comes down to earth. Each of us must recognise that there are difficulties on the earth, but not in heaven, and that the solution to these difficulties can be found in putting ourselves in relation to heaven, that is, in drawing our strength from heaven. "Every good gift and every perfect gift comes down from above, from the Father of lights, with whom is no variation nor shadow of turning" (@James 1: 17). It is a question of whether we wish to obtain what we need from heaven. If so, difficulties would disappear quickly. Then there is the house of God. It is down here but is linked to heaven by "a ladder ... set up on the earth" (@Genesis 28: 12) and God is above it. Then there are messengers who ascend and descend upon it, to bring to us from heaven what will be of use to us. This is probably what
{228}
Solomon had in mind. Whatever the difficulty, his desire is that we should put ourselves in relation to the house of God, God will respond from heaven. He will respond in such a manner that every difficulty is overcome, whether it relates to an individual, to several, to a company or to Israel in general. If only we could come to the house of God when those difficulties arise, God would always send what meets our need by means of this ladder.
Th.D. Who are these messengers who ascend and descend on the ladder?
W.J.H. These are servants whom the Lord uses, ministers to those who do His will.
P.N. The recipient of this ministry is asleep. Is this a type of death?
W.J.H. I think it is rather that we should find rest in the house of God. I think that, instead of being excited and troubled, we should sleep peacefully on this stone. It is not the sleep of indifference but of peace. The pillow may be a little hard but it is a pillow. Jacob says, "This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven" (@Genesis 28: 17). The house of God is not heaven itself but it is the gate and, when you are at the gate, you are not far from entering.
{229}
Th.D. Why does he find this a dreadful place?
W.J.H. He did not have a good conscience. He had taken what belonged to his brother and he had lied. This was not the case with David, when he said, "Blessed are they that dwell in thy house -- they will be constantly praising thee" (@Psalm 84: 4). Jacob judged himself later -- he said, "Put away the strange gods that are among you, and cleanse yourselves, and change your garments; and we will arise, and go up to Bethel; and I will make there an altar to the God that answered me in the day of my distress" (@Genesis 35: 2, 3).
D.V. Could we say that Mary was in the house but Martha was outside?
W.J.H. Both were inside but Mary was listening to what the Lord was saying, Martha was not doing so; she was distracted.
J.B. Does our attitude towards the house indicate our state?
W.J.H. The source of all local difficulties is in a lie; in saying so, I speak soberly. If there is trouble among the saints, something false is present. Jacob had deceived Isaac, He deceived him by means of
{230}
Rebecca. Sisters sometimes deceive brothers; then the house of God is a dreadful place. There is need to face up to things, to judge oneself, to purify oneself, to change one's garments, in order, then, to go up to Bethel.
M. Whom does Solomon represent?
W.J.H. "It is Christ ... who is also at the right hand of God; who also intercedes for us" (@Romans 8: 34). If a brother or a sister turns away from the house of God, they are turning away from Christ. Any gathering, which turns aside from the features of the house of God, departs from the person of Christ. This is what happened to the sons of Israel, when in spirit they returned to Egypt. In principle, they had to pass again by the rock and "the rock was the Christ" (@1 Corinthians 10: 4); the rock followed them with living water. Some of them, however, returned in their hearts to Egypt. This is what happens to those who allow certain things into their houses, like radio, for example. They return again past the rock to reach the waters of the Nile, which are of blood, frogs and demons.
D.V. Living water is in contrast with the waters of the Nile.
W.J.H. Living water flows from the rock but not a drop of it is found in a novel or a newspaper. The
{231}
rock follows us throughout our journey across the desert.
D.V. It is only by this water that the saints can be refreshed.
O.T. The rock, however, is not for the house of God but for the wilderness.
W.J.H. We have to consider Solomon's prayer. If there are those who are going astray, why is this so? Why are difficulties being encountered? Solomon prays. Nothing is lacking on the Lord's part, so why should not all be well?
J.M. Solomon's prayer gives some sense of the Lord's intercession for His own.
W.J.H. Solomon thinks about us. How are we to be adjusted together if we go astray? Solomon looks ahead. He knows that there will be difficulties and he provides for it in his prayer, in such a way that difficulties are overcome and they will be overcome, if we are ready to obey everything envisaged in this prayer.
I. Obedience is perhaps the greatest difficulty.
W.J.H. Indeed, God will do everything for us, if we obey Him. He gives the Holy Spirit to those who obey Him; for us this is
{232}
certainly the greatest gift of all.
O.T. Solomon's name means peace.
W.J.H. Yes, but there isn't always peace. "For the time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come" (@1 Peter 4: 17). There was no longer peace when Ananias and Sapphira approached with a lie; the house of God had become for them a dreadful place. There must be fear if a lie is brought into the house of God. It is dreadful to come in such a condition into the place where there are the seven lamps and the seven Spirits of God. God sees everything; nothing can be hidden from Him. There can be no peace where there is a lie. The Spirit of God is the Spirit of truth. If anyone introduces a lie, the sooner it is judged, the sooner the saints will be able to enjoy peace. Trouble will remain, however, until the matter is judged.
M. Solomon assumes that there will be self-judgment among the people before they turn towards God in the house (verse 24).
W.J.H. Before that, verse 21 is important.
I. I wonder if everyone understands properly what a lie is.
{233}
W.J.H. You try to appear what you really are not; Jacob sought to pass for Esau, Ananias and Sapphira wanted to give the impression that they were like Barnabas, who gave everything that he possessed, but they kept part for themselves. Peter said, "While it remained did it not remain to *thee*? and sold, was it not in thine own power? Why is it that thou hast purposed this thing in thy heart? Thou hast not lied to men, but to God" (@Acts 5: 4). It is not possible to deceive the Holy Spirit. To have peace, we need reality and truth. No brother or sister, having deceived the Lord, will be able to go for long without it being brought to light but it has to be faced and judged. What Solomon says in verse 21 is so touching -- "and hear thou from thy dwelling-place, from the heavens, and when thou hearest, forgive." He does not say, 'Forgive this or that but simply, 'forgive". If God were not to forgive us -- if He did not forgive the brethren at Beauvoisin -- in spite of the prayers of the Lord, it would not be possible to continue for a single day. It is not there a question of a particular act, which needs forgiveness but that we always need to be forgiven. There are so many things which do not please
{234}
God and for which we need forgiveness.
M. You mean that we have to live in an atmosphere of forgiveness, because we do so many things that need to be forgiven.
W.J.H. Those who are aware of what the house of God is down here are maintained in an atmosphere of forgiveness.
Th.D. Supplication is made "toward this place".
W.J.H. "That thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night" (verse 20). When things are happy in the house of God, by day, His eyes are on it. When things are difficult and dark, by night, His eyes are still on it.
M. So we have to pray day and night.
W.J.H. Anna did not depart from the temple, "night and day". If things were dark, she would not leave because of that. There is a tendency to move away when difficulty arises but this was not the case with Anna. She awaited the coming of the Lord. She remained in the temple until His coming, until that which would be for her "the dayspring from on high" (@Luke 1: 78). She was there in the temple, in spite of the darkness, and she was praying. She appeared at the same point as Simeon and, like Simeon, she saw God's salvation,
{235}
the dawn of a new day. This is what we need and particularly in times of darkness.
D.V. A reply results from "whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name" (@John 15: 16).
W.J.H. His name is there, in the house of God, "the place in which thou hast said thou wouldest put thy name" (verse 20).
O.T. "Make not my Father's house a house of merchandise" (@John 2: 16).
W.J.H. That is where the trouble comes from. I wish to place my name where only the name of God should be found. If I put my name there, there will be strife, whereas only God's name should be found there. How will there be peace among the brethren if I wish to have the first place among them?
O.T. "Behold, bless Jehovah, all ye servants of Jehovah, who by night stand in the house of Jehovah" (@Psalm 134: 1).
W.J.H. The priests stand during the night.
J.B. The night is outside. Inside, there is always light.
W.J.H. Exactly, but sometimes we may enter the house of God and bring the night with us. Deceit for example, belongs to the
{236}
night and not to the day but the eyes of God are on the house, even at night. For God, "the night shineth as the day" (@Psalm 139: 12).
J.B. If there is that which is of the night, it is because we introduce it; it should not characterise the house of God.
P.N. Were the epistles of Paul to Timothy written so that there should be nothing of the night in the house of God?
W.J.H. Timothy was to be careful to introduce nothing of the night. He understood the ways of Paul, who said, "But we have rejected the hidden things of shame" (@2 Corinthians 4: 2). He did not operate with craft or malice. He had set aside completely what was shameful but "by manifestation of the truth" he commended himself "to every conscience of men before God". Paul could say, on entering the house of God, that it was a happy place.
D.V. The Corinthians had introduced the night at Corinth.
W.J.H. They were not judging themselves. They allowed corruption, which is an element of darkness. Verse 23 should be seriously considered -- "then hear thou from the heavens, and do, and judge thy servants, requiting the wicked, to bring his way upon his own head; and
{237}
justifying the righteous, giving him according to his righteousness."
M. The apostle Paul says, "For I am conscious of nothing in myself; but I am not justified by this" (@1 Corinthians 4: 4). I feel that there is a need to be kept in the atmosphere of forgiveness.
J.B. And the apostle continues, "but he that examines me is the Lord".
W.J.H. If every brother and every sister were to be truthful, they would have to confess that they need divine forgiveness every day. Their whole life in relation to the house of God must be spent in the sense of forgiveness. There is no place for Pharisees. They who enter are only those who enjoy forgiveness.
A.B. Those who feel their need of forgiveness.
W.J.H. Who feel it constantly. The issue is not that I might have committed some particular offence today but that I do so many things that need forgiveness. There is constant need of it.
M. It follows that there must be the spirit of forgiveness among us, because it says, "and remit us our sins, for we also remit to every one indebted to us" (@Luke 11: 4).
{238}
W.J.H. This wonderful prayer begins with a reference to His name -- "Father, thy name be hallowed" (@Luke 11: 2). It is only later that we come to forgiveness. The Lord forgives everyone who thinks upon His name, because forgiveness is part of His name. God said to Moses, "I will proclaim the name of Jehovah before thee" (@Exodus 33: 19). "Jehovah. Jehovah God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy unto thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but by no means clearing the guilty" (@Exodus 34: 6, 7). Forgiveness is part of His name. If we do not forgive, we do not know His name and we can no longer pray in the house of God.
J.B. The spirit of forgiveness flows out of confession.
W.J.H. Forgiveness is already there before there had been confession.
J.B. But God requires confession.
W.J.H. What you are saying is not the whole truth; it is only part of it. The truth is that forgiveness is always in the heart of God but when there is confession, what is in His heart comes
{239}
to us. I wonder if it is so with us. Is there always, in every case, forgiveness in our hearts? It is not possible for it to be shown until there is confession; however, it is there. So verses 22 and 23 are very important -- "If a man have sinned against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to adjure him, and the oath come before thine altar in this house; then hear thou from the heavens, and do, and judge thy servants, requiting the wicked, to bring his way upon his own head; and justifying the righteous, giving him according to his righteousness." It refers to two brothers. If a difficulty between two brothers is not resolved, it must be taken further. More serious difficulties will arise -- later, there will be enemies and the people will be put to the worse before the enemies. Then there will be no rain and the heavens will be shut up. Subsequently, there will be famine in the land. After this, pestilence, then burning, then blight or mildew, locust or caterpillar until everything of beauty has disappeared. But all this begins with a difficulty between two brothers. How important it is to resolve the questions, which arise in the house of God.
P.N. You would say that everything in a locality
{240}
can be spoiled by two brothers in disagreement.
I. Do differences have to be resolved in God's house?
W.J.H. "In this house". We do not go before human justice as did the Corinthians but "in this house". The apostle says, "...set those to judge who are little esteemed in the assembly" (@1 Corinthians 6: 4). The less esteemed will consider for the name of God and His interests. We have often been occupied by the way in which these things affect us but what is most important is to see how they affect God. It is a matter of *His* name, *His* honour and *His* glory.
Th.D. Those who are little esteemed are the unpretentious, who consider for God in everything.
W.J.H. Anyone who has no regard for God's interests has no place in the assembly. The youngest have consideration for God and Christ, if they are in the assembly. They do not think of their parents or their friends; God has first place in their thoughts. This is what we must do if there is a difficulty between two brothers; the difficulty is placed "before thine altar in this house" (verse 22). It is the brazen altar. Everything is put in the
{241}
light of the holiness of God at Calvary. It is from this standpoint that difficulties in the house of God must be viewed, with His name before us. Things would be quickly resolved if we operated in this way. It would not take years. It did not take long for Peter to settle the question with Ananias; it was done immediately.
M. It was not in Solomon's mind that there could be a resolution independently of the house.
W.J.H. There is indeed no remedy outside the house of God. It is possible to cover evil for a certain time but nothing is resolved until everything is placed in the presence of the altar in the house of God.
P.N. In the case of Achan, in @Joshua 7, it is said to him, "...give ...glory to Jehovah the God of Israel" (@Joshua 7: 19).
W.J.H. And he told the whole truth, even as it put him in danger of being stoned. It is better to be put out of fellowship than to continue untruthfully. Joshua said to him, "...tell me now what thou hast done, keep it not back from me" and he told the whole truth. The valley of Achor is the door of hope, the only door of hope. It is a matter of judging the evil as God judges it, in such a way that God can state that it is judged. So there will be a door of hope.
{242}
P.N. For the recovery of the brother?
W.J.H. No, for the people. The brother must be left, at least for the moment. If we go down into this valley to encounter Achan and to stone him because he has introduced corruption, then there will be a door of hope. The love of Christ will be known among his people, who will say, "My husband" (@Hosea 2: 16).
M. If we judge ourselves, we shall then be able to appreciate the Lord's grace as support.
W.J.H. Yes, all that is available to each one of us. From the moment at which the Samaritan woman of @John 4 judged herself, confessing "I have not a husband" (@John 4: 17), a door of hope opens to her immediately and she finds One whom she can take for support -- "My husband". That is equally true for the assembly and for each local assembly. If Achan is judged, if those who introduce evil are judged, if each judges himself, then there is a door of hope in the restoration of the love of Christ for His assembly.
D.V. How do we understand the famine?
W.J.H. We must not go too quickly. It is a question of two brothers with a difficulty between them. We shall not have
{243}
famine if the difficulty is resolved. The famine will come only if the difficulty is not resolved. The questions raised between these two brothers are placed before the altar in the house. The evil person is judged and the righteous one is justified. It does not say, in verse 23, 'Passing over all these things', but "...requiting the wicked, to bring his way upon his own head; and justifying the righteous, giving him according to his righteousness".
D.V. Otherwise, there is famine.
W.J.H. If difficulties between two brothers are resolved, there will be no enemy attack nor will there be famine. We should notice what is given prime place by Solomon, because he is a man of wisdom. "And God gave Solomon wisdom and very great understanding and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea-shore" (@1 Kings 4: 29). He shows us here what is the root of evil, as Paul shows to the Philippians when he writes to them, "I exhort Euodia, and exhort Syntyche, to be of the same mind in the Lord" (@Philippians 4: 2). It seems that there may have been a difficulty at Philippi and Paul is concerned about it.
D.V. He did not wish them to continue as if all were well.
W.J.H. If each wishes to follow his
{244}
own path -- you, yours and I, mine -- we shall never have "the same mind in the Lord". Do we wish to do the Lord's will? That is the great question.
D.V. Solomon's prayer helps us greatly.
W.J.H. It is our earnest desire that the enemies should not attack and that the rain should be plentiful. Where everything is in order, the rain which is falling today is very precious.
D.V. I must be full of grace towards others and severe on myself.
W.J.H. A spirit of forgiveness is maintained but if there is a difficulty between two brothers, there must be the ability to recognise good, on one hand, and evil, on the other. One may be good and the other evil; both may be wrong but it is impossible that both are right. The difficulty must be brought "before thine altar in this house", placed in the presence of the death of Christ, who has suffered for sin; placed where there is divine light. This is how we know who is wrong. Evil is condemned and the one who is right is justified, so that the enemies cannot enter.
{245}
THE DOOR OF HOPE
@Hosea 2:14-23; @Joshua 7:16-26
One of the great features of the present work of God is the restoration of His people to what characterised the beginning. He never forgets what existed at the beginning. He says, "I remember for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land not sown" (@Jeremiah 2: 2). God says "I remember". He remembers us in order to restore us. This is what emerged during the last century. The Lord has never forgotten what happened at Pentecost, at the beginning of the book of the Acts, in the first days of the assembly's history. He remembers the holy love which marked the assembly at that time. He remembers it over thousands of years and He is working to restore us to it in character. It has to be accepted that there is only a little power, as the Lord says to Philadelphia; there is outward weakness, as I am sure we all admit, but the Lord says, "thou ... hast not denied my name" (@Revelation 3: 8). It is clearly not His name as Redeemer, nor as Saviour, nor
{246}
even as Lord but as Husband -- "My Husband". The marriage bond is in the Lord's thoughts at the end of the present dispensation. The Lord can say, 'There are some who do not deny my name.'
The Lord remembers better days in Beauvoisin. They are not known to me but the Lord has known them, days when the saints bore a greater testimony to Him out of affection and He is working to bring us back to this if we have moved away. He remembers our best days and He desires that each heart should remember them. Is my best day in the past? If we examine our lives, do we have to recognise that our best day belongs to the more or less distant past? If it is thus, the Lord remembers it in order to bring us back.
"Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak to her heart" (@Hosea 2: 14) and this is why we are here this afternoon. The Lord wishes to speak to our heart and in order to accomplish this, it is sometimes necessary to address our conscience, as he spoke to the conscience of the Samaritan woman -- "Go, call thy husband," (@John 4: 16). This word was addressed to her conscience but the Lord wanted to have her heart. Later, she says to the men of the city,
{247}
"Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done" (verse 29). This One is great enough to fill her heart, to be her husband, to be the husband of every heart.
My desire is that the Lord might show to everyone where the door of hope is. It may be that some brother or sister thinks that the position is hopeless. The Lord says, 'Here is a door of hope. If you wish to pass through this door, you will again have days of happiness -- "And I will give her her vineyards from thence" (verse 15). What is for the pleasure of the heart of God will grow again, for the joy of the Lord's heart and for men's. The vine says, "Should I leave my new wine, which cheers God and man, and go to wave over the trees?" (@Judges 9: 13). It is as if God were saying, 'If you wish to pass through this door of hope, there will be vineyards and I shall make a covenant with the beasts of the fields and with the fowl of the heavens and with the creeping things of the ground.' It is the Lord himself who will make a covenant with the beasts, with the lions, the wolves, the bears and the leopards so that they do not come near you. He will make a covenant with the fowl of the heavens, with the eagles, the ravens, the unclean birds, with all the spiritual influences which destroy
{248}
men in this world, so that they do not touch you. He will make a covenant with the creeping things, with the blight and mildew, with the locusts, the caterpillars, the worms and with the insects that destroy everything, in spite of their smallness. When the locusts pass through, they do not leave a single green leaf, not a blade of grass. All these things are very serious. God says, 'I shall make a covenant with them for you, so that they will not come near you.' "And I will break bow and sword and battle out of the land" (verse 18). There will be no more warfare, no enemies, no blight, no drought but plenty of rain. How valuable to have rain! What would the earth be without rain? What would a meeting be without rain? Do we have rain in Beauvoisin? When we read the Scriptures, dear brethren, do we have rain? What would the earth be without rain? We could have the best of land but, if it is not watered by the rain, it is a desert.
What then is this door of hope? It is the valley of Achor. Achor means trouble. We know that no one likes trouble in a place. We would rather be at ease -- Laodicea says, "I am rich, and am grown rich, and have need of nothing" (@Revelation 3: 17) and the Lord is outside the door. If there is no exercise, He will not enter, He will enter only if
{249}
there is willingness to be awakened and stirred from ease. In the Song of Songs, the beloved has gone to rest; she did not wish to be disturbed and distance has come in. May it not be so in this meeting! He cannot enter if there is no exercise. That is the door of hope, the only door. It is important to go down into the valley of Achor; one goes there with great exercise of soul, but that is ultimately where there is the door of hope, to know the love of Christ and to say to Him, 'My husband'.
"For I will take away the names of the Baals out of her mouth, and they shall no more be remembered by their name" (@Hosea 2: 17). There are Christians who have many Baals, many masters but the Lord is not one of these. He is '*The Lord*', '*My husband*' . He will never be one of the Lords. The church should say to Him, 'My husband'. Local assemblies should say to Him, 'My husband'. Each individual heart should say to Him, 'My husband'. The Lord brings us to this blessed position by making us pass through the door of hope which is the valley of Achor. Are we ready to go into this valley and face up to deep trouble or do we prefer to continue without the Lord's support? Laodicea is disposed to continue without Him but she does
{250}
not have the Lord and the Lord does not have her. If we do not have the Lord, what do we have? Nothing. "...and knowest not that *thou* art the wretched and the miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked" (@Revelation 3: 17). If we do not have Christ, we have nothing. Unless He is our husband, possesses our hearts and is supreme in them, all that occupies us means nothing to Him. If he does not have this place, He has nothing and we also have nothing. "Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness," far from the area of the thoughts of man, "and speak to her heart" (@Hosea 2: 14). He is going to do for her what He did at the beginning, when she left Egypt. He wants to produce in her the features which marked her at that time. That is why He presents the valley of Achor to her as a door of hope.
Dear brethren, there is no way other than to go down into this valley. It is dreadful because it raises serious questions for each one of us. God says, 'Israel has sinned; I can no longer be with him.' "Israel hath sinned, and they have also transgressed my covenant which I commanded them, and they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and dissembled also, and they have put it among their stuff." (@Joshua 7: 11). In such conditions, they will not be able to face
{251}
the enemies. They were on their way to take Ai, a small town, smaller than Jericho, but they had to flee before the men of Ai. There is no longer the ability to face a small matter. They thought that Ai could be taken by around three thousand men but they were beaten. The three thousand fled and thirty-six of them were struck down. Joshua rends his clothes and falls on his face. "Alas Lord Jehovah, wherefore hast thou at all brought this people over the Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? Oh that we had been content and had remained beyond the Jordan! Ah Lord! what shall I say after Israel have turned their backs before their enemies?" (@Joshua 7: 7, 8). Jehovah said to Him, "Rise up ... Israel hath sinned" (verse 10). 'He has stolen, he has lied! I can no longer be with Israel'. Who is responsible? Who? It is a question which must be answered by each heart. The Lord spoke in the same way at the meal before introducing the supper -- "Verily I say to you, One of you shall deliver me up; he who is eating with me." (@Mark 14: 18). John asks, "Is it I?" He does not say, 'It is impossible for me to deliver you up.' He says, 'Lord look into my heart and see if it is I.'
{252}
What an exercise this was for John. Peter also says, 'Is it I?' The most prominent brother in the meeting, the one who gives a lead, asks, 'Is it I?' He examines what is in his own heart. He probes himself -- 'Am I unbelieving? Am I about to betray the Master? Is there a lie in my heart?' Each one of the twelve asks himself questions of this kind.
In this seventh chapter of Joshua, each tribe has to come forward. Think of the fear and trembling which must have filled the heart of the tribe of Reuben. Think of the testing of the tribe of Levi. Think of the anguish of the tribe of Joseph, of the tribe of Benjamin. "And the tribe of Judah was taken" (verse 16). It was the greatest and most responsible tribe. Everyone is gripped with fear, every one who is a member of the tribe of Judah. All the families are called, one after the other. Every family looks into its own heart. Every family is aware of the Lord's gaze; the seven eyes penetrate their heart. Then every household which was taken is asked to examine itself. Then each man comes forward, one by one. The test is no longer for one tribe, nor for one family, nor even for one house, but for each individual man. It is a very serious matter.
{253}
Every man, every brother, every sister is called to appear before the Lord so that He may examine what is in his heart. Have I transgressed His commandments? Have I stolen? Have I lied? Is there sin on my hands?
Finally, Achan is taken. The lot falls on Achan. God has seen right to the source of all the evil. The Lord always works in this way. We often concern ourselves with much detail, but the Lord's desire is that we should go directly to the source. It is the way in which God acted in the garden of Eden -- He found the source of all the trouble in the serpent, which is the origin of lies. Adam and Eve had stolen what belonged to God. Behind the sin there is a lie and Satan is its father (@John 8: 44). It was also in this way that God acted in the wilderness, when the brazen serpent was lifted up -- God wished to show to the people where the source of all the evil was to be found. The same applies to local difficulties. There will be no adjustment locally if we do not go to the source and lying is the source. Achan had stolen, under the eye of God. Joshua exposes it.
What had he stolen? A garment of Shinar. He had seen a splendid garment from
{254}
Babylon and he had stolen it. He acknowledges it. He was going to be stoned but he told the truth. Even if one has to be stoned, the truth must be told. There must be no lying. He says, 'I coveted it and I hid it in my tent, in the ground'. He thought that it was so well hidden that no one could see it. What is this splendid garment? It is clerical clothing. It may be said, 'But that is not what I coveted'. Ah! God sees what is in your hearts, dear brethren. Would you wear a Babylonish garment? Aren't there difficulties when a brother seeks the first place, when he wishes to run the meeting himself? He does not declare it, but it is in his heart, although no one knows it.
That garment was not worn by Paul; he had no garment of Shinar. He said, "For we do not preach ourselves, but Christ Jesus Lord, and ourselves your bondmen for Jesus¬ sake" (@2 Corinthians 4: 5). We are not masters, we are not lords, but your bondmen. Is this how it is with the brothers and sisters here? "Your bondmen for Jesus¬ sake", ready to wash the saints¬ feet, ready to serve the interests of the assembly.
{255}
Phoebe did not wear a garment of Shinar. Paul says, "But I commend to you Phoebe, our sister, who is minister of the assembly which is in Cenchrea" (@Romans 16: 1). Phoebe is so needed in local assemblies, "...for *she* also has been a helper of many, and of myself." (verse 2) You will not find a garment of Shinar in Phoebe's tent. You can search; nothing of this kind is hidden in the ground. Do we possess a thing of this kind, dear brethren? The seven eyes of the Lord scrutinise our circumstances to see if there is one.
Achan says, "I saw among the spoils a beautiful garment of Shinar, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a golden bar of fifty shekels weight, and I coveted them and took them; and behold, they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it" (verse 21). Silver represents the Lordship of Jesus; He is Lord and He must be the only Lord. Elders must not be lords in the assembly. They have to carry concern for the sheep and care for them. "The elders which are among you I exhort," Peter says, "who am their fellow elder ... shepherd the flock of God which is among you, exercising oversight, not by necessity, but willingly; not for base gain, but readily -- not as
{256}
lording it over your possessions, but being models for the flock" (@1 Peter 5:1-3). We must not take the place which belongs to the Lord. Achan says, 'I saw gold and I coveted it'. It is subtle. To have a little glory ... ! But Beauvoisin's glory is for God, for Christ. It is He who will have the glory and not we. It is not for the most important brother nor for the least; it is not for the most advanced sister, nor for the youngest.
God says, 'Someone has usurped the glory that belongs to me; I can no longer be with Israel. The enemy will enter the land; the beasts of the field will enter it, lions, wolves, bears, leopards. The birds of the heavens, eagles and ravens, will invade and so will serpents. There will be famine, pestilence, blight, mildew, caterpillars and locusts. I can no longer be with the people unless they judge themselves. That is the door of hope for the people. If you need me, you must face up to the situation. If you wish to have me with you, this matter must be settled. Along with Achan, you must go down to the bottom of this valley with all the people, with every man, woman and child. This man must be stoned; the guilty one has to be stoned'. It is not sufficient to have
{257}
half of Israel, or a part, or two or three brothers. "All Israel" must stone Achan. "And all Israel stoned him with stones; and they burned them with fire, and stoned them with stones. And they raised over him a great heap of stones, which is there to this day" (@Joshua 7: 25, 26). There must be a heap of stones to bear witness to what has been done. The heap of stones is the testimony to the judgment which has been executed.
When taking Achan for execution, Joshua took everything which belonged to him, the silver, the mantle and the bar of gold. He also took "his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had" (@Joshua 7: 24). Someone may say, 'But that was unrighteous.' It was righteous, because they had taken part in it. His sons and his daughters were in the tent; they took part in it, just as Sapphira was linked to Ananias. Peter does not wait for Sapphira to speak, he says, "Tell me if ye gave the estate for so much? And she said, Yes, for so much. And Peter said to her, Why is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord?" (@Acts 5: 8, 9). His wife had colluded with him in the lie, as is the case with many wives in relation to their husbands. Sisters are not exempt from trouble. If there is trouble,
{258}
sisters have their part. Peter has no pity on Sapphira. God operated Himself as to Ananias but Peter intervenes in respect of Sapphira and says to her, "Lo the feet of those that have buried thy husband are at the door, and they shall carry thee out" (@Acts 5: 9). She fell dead at Peter's feet. So everything that belonged to Achan was stoned with him and was burned with him, first of all "the silver, and the mantle, and the bar of gold", then "his sons, and his daughters", then "his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep" (verse 24). All his resources had been falsely used but note that, before the execution of the judgment, Achan acknowledges everything -- "I coveted them and took them; and behold they are hid ..." (verse 21).
In Hosea, we learn that this valley of Achor is a door of hope. It is the door divinely placed before the people. When the Baals have come in, when hearts no longer belong to the Lord, when no one any longer says, 'My husband', then the vines disappear, the lions enter the country, along with the wolves, the grasshoppers and the worms. This is the door of hope -- judge the causes of the trouble at the root and condemn mercilessly those who are responsible. But how? Each one must say, 'Is it I?' It is not
{259}
by saying, "God, I thank thee that I am not as the rest of men" (@Luke 18: 11) that matters are resolved, but in self-judgment, in the state of mind of the sinner who said, "Oh God, have compassion on me, the sinner" (@Luke 18: 13). The only way to deal with evil, wherever it may be found, is for each, in the first place, to say for himself, 'Lord, is it I? Does the lot fall on my tribe, on my family, on my house, finally on me?' This is how the matter is dealt with in this deep valley of self-judgment, where the door of hope is. There is no other door. We may try to sort things out or to mend them but that will collapse at one point or another.
Dear brethren, be assured that we cannot make a covenant with the lions, the wolves or the leopards. Do you think that they would want to listen to us? No. When the wolf comes, it is to devour the sheep. When the eagle comes, it is to fall on its prey. When millions of grasshoppers strike a country, it is to eat every green thing. But the Lord says, 'I will make a covenant with them, if you pass through this door of hope.'
If not, he leaves us to the lions, the wolves, the leopards, the eagles, the grasshoppers
{260}
and the worms. The vines are ravaged and there is no more rain. May it not be so in this gathering. On the contrary, may there be many vines, producing wine which rejoices the heart of God and men, uplifting the heart and bringing joy in such a way that, on hearing reference to Beauvoisin, the brethren are all filled with joy!
So if we accept this door of hope, we shall see better days again as the assembly returns to better days, the days of its beginnings in exclusive love for Christ. We need to be exercised about this. It is evident that the Lord desires to bring the assembly back to its condition at the beginning. It is well worth it, dear brethren, to go down into the valley of Achor with all these exercises, in order to have this expression of the heart on our lips, in the last days of the assembly -- "My husband".
May it be so! Amen.
{261}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD - TENTH READING
@2 Chronicles 5; @2 Chronicles 7:1-3
W.J.H. It is evident that God never leaves anything incomplete. In the world there are monuments to incompletion everywhere but God finishes everything. Thus He says, "And the heavens and the earth and all their host were finished" (@Genesis 2: 1). All man's science can add nothing to God's work. The work of the Lord Jesus on the cross was also completed. He said, "It is finished" (@John 19: 30). We are approaching the moment when the present work of God will be finished. That is what we come to this afternoon -- Solomon completes his work.
A particular perfection characterises the completion of God's work. There is always something incomplete and imperfect about man's work. Even an object, which has the appearance of having been well finished, when placed under a microscope, is revealed as incomplete. But examine the smallest thing created by God, using the most powerful microscope and you will find it complete and perfect. What will be the beauty and perfection of the temple of God, on the completion of this habitation of which
{262}
it says, "This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have desired it"? (@Psalm 132: 14). It is called by the prophet Isaiah, "the house of my magnificence" (@Isaiah 60: 7). When Solomon had completed it, he brought in all the utensils which David had dedicated. During his lifetime, David had opened a treasury to receive these gifts. What he had dedicated himself was placed there, along with all that had been dedicated by "Samuel the seer, and Saul the son of Kish, and Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah" (@1 Chronicles 26: 28). All this was put into the hands of a trustworthy Levite, to be cared for until Solomon was ready to receive it. That is wonderful and very encouraging.
M. Do you mean that there is something held apart at present, which is not yet in the temple, but will be put there when it is completed?
W.J.H. How many there are who do not yet know Solomon! In the reply of one to King David, there was the expression of the desire that Solomon should be greater than David (@1 Kings 1: 37) but many Christians know only David. They know Him who fought against death and Satan, and they love Him; all these vessels are part of the treasure.
{263}
Now think about Samuel and all the benefit of prophetic ministry. Samuel presided over the prophets (see @1 Samuel 19: 20). All that Samuel dedicated is in the treasure of David. In measure, we know something of prophetic ministry in the way that the Lord speaks to us prophetically in order to bring us into contact with God.
Then there is what Saul had dedicated; it is difficult to say what he had dedicated, but nevertheless there was something, little as it may have been. This is very encouraging, for most of us feel that, like Saul, we have wasted a large part of our life living for the flesh, rather than for Christ and for the work of God but if we have given something, however little value it may have, David keeps it in his treasure. Everything that Saul dedicated is there. I think it is one of the most wonderful features of divine grace.
Th.D. It might not have been thought that David would wish to accept anything from Saul.
W.J.H. I suppose that the best thing that came from Saul was Mephibosheth, his grandson. Jonathan was a valuable vessel, but Mephibosheth was even more precious.
Then there is what Abner had dedicated.
{264}
This is addressed to elderly brethren who have departed from the path for many years and are brought back towards the end of their days. Abner had made a covenant with David at the end of his life. In this regard we do not want to be like Abner. Young brothers and sisters ought not to imitate him. It was grace on David's part to put what Abner had dedicated into the treasure.
Finally, there is what Joab had dedicated. He was *the* most difficult character in David's kingdom. He always has something to say but he is motivated by a spirit which is entirely wrong. He is a hard man; David judges him severely and Solomon puts him to death. Such will be the end of every hard man -- he will disappear. However, David puts Joab's whole contribution into the treasure. Everything is put in reserve in view of the wonderful day when Solomon will introduce it into the temple. Not one vessel will be lost.
M. Do you think that there are believers today who do not form part of the temple?
W.J.H. I think that few believers know Solomon. They know David and are content with that but David wants us to know Solomon, the great builder of the house of God. David
{265}
could not build it. The Lord wants us to be interested in Solomon and to love him.
Th.D. What do we have in knowing David and what do we gain by the knowledge of Solomon?
W.J.H. The work of David is seen in the activities of Christ in regard of Simon, the son of Jonas, a "sinful man". The Lord works in his heart until Simon loves him -- "Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I am attached to thee" (@John 21: 15), poor weak man who denies his Master! But Solomon represents Christ incorporating this man as a stone in the spiritual house of God. The Lord says to him, "Thou art Simon, the son of Jonas; thou shalt be called Cephas (which interpreted is stone)" (@John 1: 42).
Th.D. Jonathan loved David, but he was never a stone in Solomon's temple.
W.J.H. He fell on mount Gilboa and David wept, because he would miss the succession of Solomon. This is how the Lord feels as to us if we do not enter into these thoughts now.
P.N. I should like to know if the woman in chapter 7 of Luke might correspond to what we
{266}
have with David and whether Mary in chapter 12 of John would correspond to what we have with Solomon?
W.J.H. Most of us are content with chapter 7 of Luke -- "Thy sins are forgiven ... Thy faith has saved thee; go in peace" (@Luke 7: 48, 50). Where are you going to go? If you go truly where the Lord sends you, you will go to chapter 12 of John, where Christ is honoured, to fill the house with the odour of the ointment. It says, "There therefore they made him a supper" (@John 12: 2). Your journey is not complete until you reach that point.
M. Peter says, "To whom coming, a living stone ... yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house," (@1 Peter 2: 4, 5). Does that mean that there is a movement on our part before we have a place in the building?
W.J.H. I think that means that, having loved David, you see Solomon and you come in order to be incorporated into the building. A single stone is not a building; it may be a beautiful stone but one stone is not a building. That is what independent Christians are; they are only scattered stones, not assembled. But the apostle says, "yourselves also, as living stones,
{267}
are being built up a spiritual house". The work of God is continuing.
M. Do you mean that "being built up" in this passage signifies that we have some little understanding of what the assembly is?
W.J.H. Instead of saying that I am so happy that I will go to heaven when I die, you realise that you have been chosen for the pleasure of God in His assembly. This idea of eventually going to heaven indicates a lot of selfishness. The temple is for the glory of God; we must hold on to this -- "the house of *my* magnificence".
M. All that had been acquired by David and by Solomon will find a place in the temple.
W.J.H. It is an effect of the Lord's grace but we ought not, for this reason, to be Abners, Joabs or Sauls, simply because we know that nothing that belongs to the Lord will be lost; that would be a sad point of view. Why not arrive now, with all our heart, at these blessed thoughts? It is well worth it.
Solomon assembled there *all* Israel -- the elders of Israel, all the heads of tribes, the princes of the fathers and all the men of Israel -- to be present at this scene of the completion
{268}
of the work, to see the ark enter its eternal habitation. It was the most magnificent procession ever seen in the universe. They all followed in order to see the ark leave the tent where, in grace, it had sojourned for so many years and enter its eternal habitation. What a wonderful spectacle. All worship as they contemplate it.
This has been developing over recent years -- the ark is on its way and all those whose hearts have been touched are following it. I think that all that has been opened up regarding the person of the Lord in His humanity and His deity, the truth as to His deity and as to His sonship, is the beginning of the movement of the ark towards its eternal habitation, and holy worshippers follow it.
"And king Solomon, and all the assembly of Israel, that were assembled to him before the ark, sacrificed sheep and oxen which could not be counted nor numbered for multitude" (@2 Chronicles 5: 6). This great movement of the ark towards its own place is the occasion of innumerable sacrifices. Are we contributing to them? I wonder whether we have in our souls a view of this procession, the last stage in the journey of the ark. It will never again be in the wilderness, never again under a
{269}
tent. This brings sacrifices on the part of each one; it is the last opportunity for sacrifices of this kind. See what happens at this moment, dear brethren. Wonderful sacrifices are offered on the earth today by those who form part of this procession, by brothers and sisters, by youths and maidens, by children. They offer sacrifices because they see the ark in its final movement towards its eternal habitation. I should like to encourage each of us to engage in this.
M. There will be no completion until the ark is in its place.
W.J.H. There will not be full completion until the glory fills the house but this is very near; the glory is not far off. The ark will soon be in its resting place. This is what David had in view from his youth. He said, "Arise, Jehovah, into thy rest, thou and the ark of thy strength" (@Psalm 132: 8). We shall always see the staves of the ark; they will never be used again. The ark will never be carried again, for it has reached its resting place, but we shall always see the staves. It says that they were seen before the oracle. The journey which the Lord undertook -- taking the form of a bondman, being in the likeness of men, becoming
{270}
obedient even unto the death of the cross, and accompanying His own through the wilderness -- this journey is finished but the staves remain there to augment the worship. All who enter the oracle see the staves and that reminds them of the journey. Who could forget the journey of the holy ark?
M. The staves remain there, even if they are not being used.
W.J.H. They are always in the affections of the saints; they remain there. This building is made of living stones; each has a heart, a mind, hands and feet, and the staves are in the heart of the saints.
P.N. Do we have the thought of the staves when the Lord shows Thomas His hands and His side, and later, in the Revelation, when we see the Lamb "as slain"?
W.J.H. It is exactly the same thought, presented in a different way. The marks remind everyone of the Lord's sufferings. In @Revelation 5, it says, "...a Lamb standing, *as slain* ..." (@Revelation 5: 6), not 'as if He had been slain'. As to time, it is a fact in the past but eternally present in its significance. The Lamb appears *as* slain, as if it
{271}
had just happened. This is the way it is seen in heaven.
Ques. The ends of the staves were not seen outside. What does that mean?
W.J.H. We have to enter the immediate presence of God to see it. The closer we are to God, the better we understand the meaning of this great journey. Those who are *in* heaven in @Revelation 5 have a better knowledge of the value of the sacrifice of Christ than those who are on the earth, because they are closer to Him.
Th.D. Those who were not inside said, "Is not this the son of the carpenter?" They had no view of His pathway here below.
W.J.H. It is not seen from the exterior. Only those closest to God can see the staves.
Th.D. So not all believers see the staves?
W.J.H. One may be in the court, in the holy place or in the holiest but the staves can be seen only if one is in the holiest, and for one outside the court only the door overlaid with bronze can be seen. That is all that a worldly man can see.
{272}
"And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the oracle of the house, into the most holy place, under the wings of the cherubim; and the cherubim stretched forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and its staves above" (@2 Chronicles 5: 7, 8). For our help, the Spirit of God enlarges on this place in which the ark is placed; it is "its place", the place which is proper to it. No one would think that a tent would be good enough for the ark; no one would think that "the fields of the wood" would be good enough for the ark. David says, "...we found it in the fields of the wood" (@Psalm 132: 6). The ark was in the world, in this very world, but it is not a suitable place for it. The ark remained under a tent through the desert but David says that that is not good enough for it. The ark is now in "its place". We are told what this place is -- "into *the oracle of the house*, into *the most holy place*, under *the wings of the cherubim*."
That is where the ark will be for ever, in *the oracle*, where the voice of God is heard. The oracle is the place where God speaks; it is the greatest place in the universe. It is a great privilege for us to speak to God but it is much more wonderful to hear God speak. This is what happens
{273}
in the oracle; God speaks there. It will be thus for ever. It says that, on the holy mountain. Moses and Elias appeared "in glory" (@Luke 9: 31); and the voice from the glory said, "*This* is my beloved Son -- hear him" (@Luke 9: 35) since He is in the oracle, in the glory. This will be our occupation -- we shall be hearers for ever in the oracle. We do not yet know what God will have to say to us in eternity but all that is said comes from the oracle, where the ark is.
"*Into the most holy place*". There are other places, which are holy. The great house, the court, the sea, the lavers, the altar and the door are holy but the most holy place is where the ark is. In the epistle to the Hebrews it says, "For the Christ is not entered into holy places made with hand ... but into heaven itself" (@Hebrews 9: 24); it is this place, the most holy place.
"*Under the wings of the cherubim*". The following verse speaks of the cherubim -- "and the cherubim stretched forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and its staves above." I think that means that never again will anyone touch the holy person of Jesus. His face was spit upon down here; the Lord of glory was crucified. Christendom crucifies Him again in apostasy. It says in
{274}
Hebrews that they crucify "for themselves as they do the Son of God" (@Hebrews 6: 6) but no one will touch the ark. It is under the wings of the cherubim for eternity.
Rem. Not only the ark, but also the staves are under the wings of the cherubim.
W.J.H. That is very beautiful. They protect divine impressions of the pathway of Christ in the souls of the saints; they can never be touched. The testimonies of this pathway are under the wings of the cherubim.
"There was nothing in the ark save the two tables which Moses put there at Horeb, when Jehovah made a covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt" (@2 Chronicles 5: 10). It is wonderful to see that the golden pot, which held the manna seems to have disappeared, as also had Aaron's rod which budded. These things were found in the tabernacle, because we needed them in the wilderness. We needed the manna, we needed the grace of priestly support and we found them without fail in the wilderness but there is no longer need of them. The time for the manna has passed as has the day of priestly support. All that remains is the holy covenant, God's wonderful covenant, the eternal covenant. Stone suggests what is eternal. "The two tables" are
{275}
there for ever. On one table there is what is for God; on the other, what is for men. They are kept in the ark for ever. He is God -- it ensures everything for God; He is Man, "the man Christ Jesus", and this ensures everything for men. The two tables of stone are there for ever in the holy ark.
M. Would you say a few words on the feast of the seventh month?
W.J.H. The seventh month represents the end of time. Seven, in Scripture, always means that matters are complete, whether in reference to the seventh day or to the seventh man. Enoch was the seventh from Adam; "God took him" -- that is his end. Similarly with the seventh month, it marks the end of time. What remains then is eternity.
What follows in verses 11 and 12 is very beautiful. When this point is reached, the priests no longer observe their courses. The courses are important down here but now everything is done in holy liberty. Every priest is clothed in fine white linen. "Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness" (Psalm 132: 9). Here, they are all dressed in this way. The cymbals, the lutes, the harps and the trumpets are heard. It is
{276}
a wonderful moment. The cymbal is an instrument, which is played with the hands; it is a matter of what we do with our hands. The lutes and harps have to do with our hearts; they are stringed instruments. The trumpet is related to our spirits; the trumpet is blown. The spirit, the soul and the body are now active in all the priests. It says, "...to make *one voice* to be heard..." (@2 Chronicles 5: 13). This is what God is awaiting -- "one voice". "It came to pass when the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one voice to be heard in praising and thanking Jehovah..." The top note seems to be when a single sound is produced by the hands, by the heart and by the spirit, "one voice". Quite often, there are two or three voices with us. We may hear a brother sound the trumpet but we think about his hands, his business, the activity of his hands; the two are not in accord. We hear him sound the trumpet, he speaks of wonderful things which he has grasped mentally, but his heart has not been touched. His words are dry; there is only one sound but God wants to lead us to the point where the works of our hands, our movements of heart and the worship of our spirit blend into
{277}
the same voice. God then has the whole being. When there was one voice, *then* "the house, the house of Jehovah, was filled with a cloud". It was at that particular moment, *then*, "the house of Jehovah was filled with a cloud and the priests could not stand to do their service because of the cloud; for the glory of Jehovah had filled the house of God" (@2 Chronicles 5: 13, 14). This is what takes place, or does not take place, in our meetings on Lord's Day morning. When all the instruments merged into one single voice, it was *then* that the glory filled the house, it was *then* that the cloud descended. So great was the glory that the priests could not stand in the house to do their service. All that they could do was to prostrate themselves in the presence of God. All formal and official service was at an end and each heart bowed low in the presence of God. This took place at that particular moment.
M. I think that it must have taken some time for that point to be reached, where all the instruments merged into one voice.
W.J.H. What emerges is the attainment of a climax. We have one voice, then, to which point we have arrived gradually.
{278}
P.N. You mean that there is a period of formation.
W.J.H. There is something similar in our Lord's Day morning meetings. You hear a cymbal, then a lute, then a harp and perhaps also a trumpet but they do not merge. Sometimes, however -- blessed be God -- this point is reached. Sometimes after the Supper, you may hear a cymbal, a lute, a harp or a trumpet and the sound is the same. We then have experience of the cloud and that is something of great importance. The brethren would remember that. If I have a trumpet, I must be careful that the note, which I sound is the same as that of the harp or the cymbal, otherwise, there is discord and God is not the author of that. Whatever the key set by the Chief Musician at that time, each hymn or thanksgiving, as under His direction, will have the same pitch and it is *then* that we shall have the sense of the divine presence. If we do not reach *one voice*, we shall not have the cloud.
Th.D. I think that that is very important, because we often have different sounds and there is no harmony. There must be *one voice*.
{279}
W.J.H. Do we really believe that there is in the assembly a great Musician, the Chief Musician? No one should act, except under the direction of the Chief Musician. It is sometimes the mind of the Chief Musician to bring a note of worship to the Father. He leads in this direction and, under His leading, a note from the cymbal or the harp is heard. I may digress from this and return to Christ's sufferings on the cross or I may speak to Him of what He was here on earth. That may all be very fine but if the Chief Musician has set a different note, I introduce disorder and we shall not have the cloud. It was *when* there was one voice that the cloud came down and praise ascended.
M. Would you say something about the discernment of the note set by the Chief Musician?
W.J.H. It is said of some of the musicians in David's time that they played *under the direction of the king*. This is how it happens in reality; our will does not intrude. It is the king who is supreme. There are sometimes brothers who act, to a certain degree, according to their own will -- 'I have expressed a certain kind of thanksgiving for years and I
{280}
do not wish to change.' Such brothers are not under the direction of the king and they bring in disorder.
M. On the other hand, it may happen that a brother is genuinely exercised, because he is not sure that the contribution that he wishes to make is in harmony with the direction of the Chief Musician and, in the end, he says nothing, fearful of introducing something which is not according to the Lord's mind.
W.J.H. I think that is valid. When we feel that the Lord as Chief Musician is leading in a certain direction, and we are conscious that He has given us something in this way, it becomes a matter of placing it under His control and it will then be of use. If, however, what we have in mind does not lead in this direction, even although it may be entirely correct, it is not the time to express it and we must remain silent if we wish to have the cloud, and we very much desire it, for the greatest moment down here is one in the joy of the presence of the cloud. If we have one minute of joy in the presence of the cloud, dear brethren, it will not be forgotten throughout the whole of our lives.
J.M. What is the thought as to the presence
{281}
of Asaph, Heman and Jeduthun in relation to this?
W.J.H. I think that they are the great leaders of song, the great musicians under the direction of Christ. If the apostle Paul were to be in a Lord's Day morning meeting, I think that the brethren would feel the need to regard the note set by our David by means of Paul. I think that is what is seen in these three men -- they are leaders of song, all set under the direction of the king, for there is only one Chief Musician, *the* Chief Musician.
I refer to chapter 7 only to show that this same privilege is available to us in the prayer meeting. It was when Solomon had finished his prayer that the cloud descended again. I wonder if our prayer meetings finish in this way. Solomon brought the people into contact with God by his prayer. The cloud descended once again and it says that they "...bowed themselves with their faces to the ground on the pavement, and worshipped and thanked Jehovah" (@2 Chronicles 7: 3).
M. Do you not think that the golden altar has to do with worship on Lord's Day morning?
W.J.H. It seems to me that the predominant
{282}
thought in incense is prayer. Praise is also included in prayer. There is no real prayer without praise. The order presented in Scripture is prayer, supplication and thanksgiving (@Philippians 4: 6). These elements are blended. They form part of what is mixed to make the incense. The thought before us is that the effect of Solomon's prayer is to bring the presence of God. That is what we desire for Monday evening. The previous scene comes within our range on Lord's Day but here we have the great model for Monday evening.
P.G. Why do you refer to Monday evening in regard of prayer? Is there a moral reason for this?
W.J.H. Don't you think that you would wish to pray as soon as possible after this scene, before you might lose the sense of it? If the glory had filled the house on Lord's Day morning, I think that everyone would think, 'The sooner I pray after this scene the better'. We are certainly not subject to rules but you will notice that the customs, which become widespread among the saints, are generally good customs. Almost universally, Monday evening is the evening for prayer.
{283}
Ques. Would these passages not indicate that those who break bread would, as far as possible, be present for prayer?
W.J.H. It is very regrettable that brothers and sisters who come to the Lord's Day morning meeting might not come to the prayer meeting. If we think that we might receive a vision of the glory, I do not believe that many of us would be absent.
{284}
THE POWER OF HIS RESURRECTION
@Philippians 3:8-12; @Mark 16:1-7; @Luke 24:1-8
When the apostle says, "...to know him, and *the power of his resurrection* ..." (verse 10), it is not simply a matter of the resurrection. All who are nominal Christians today recognise the resurrection of Christ as a fact. There is reference to it in the creeds of all orthodox denominations but the apostle is not speaking in this way when he says, "...to know him, and the power of his resurrection" -- it is the present power of His resurrection. He wishes to know this power and to know it at present.
There are foolish people who say that there is no resurrection. The apostle asks, "...how say some among you that there is not a resurrection of those that are dead?" (@1 Corinthians 15: 12). Is it beyond belief that God should raise the dead? I should like all such to tell me why they do not believe it. I know that most will say to me, 'I believe only what I see and what I understand'. Do you reason in this way? Do you believe only what you understand or
{285}
what you see? Tell me then what you know of the ways of the ant, how God has given it such wisdom, how it knows to go out in summer and gather all it needs for the winter. Do you understand that? You certainly don't. You say, 'I can see the ant, observe it, note its mode of operation and I accept what I see, although I do not understand it'. Well, why do you say that you do not believe what you do not understand?
You say that you do not believe what you do not see? Do you see the atmosphere? How is it that it exists; where does it come from; who made it; what is it composed of? Do you see it? No, you don't see it. Does that mean that there is no atmosphere? No one would deny its existence. Although you cannot see it, you believe, nevertheless, that it exists.
How can you, therefore, not accept what you cannot see or what you cannot understand? We cannot see the greatest forces of nature, the greatest principles of life. Have you ever seen the life principle itself? Look into a grain of
{286}
wheat; do you find it there? You find nothing. Examine an egg; it is invisible. Does it, then, not exist? It would be irrational to speak like that. Who has seen the wind? Everyone feels its force but no one sees it. So it is with all the greatest things in the world; they are invisible.
No one saw Christ arise from the dead; He arose, nonetheless. It may be that you do not understand the power of resurrection but it exists. What effect does it have? It makes people capable of living in another world. Someone may say that it took place two thousand years ago and belongs to the past. I wonder what each of you thinks of that, dear friends. Think of the power of God in creation -- "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth" (@Genesis 1: 1) and brought them to completion. "And the heavens and the earth and all their host were finished" (@Genesis 2: 1). Does this power continually exist or is it only a fact of history? Does the creative power which existed then exist today? Are not the eternal power and divinity of God still evident in creation? Does the fact that the creation was finished mean that power to create no longer exists? If this is
{287}
so, how is it that sun rises in the morning and sets at night, that the earth turns on its axis, that the grass grows, that the birds fly? Where do the peacock's feathers come from? The power of creation is still there. The creation itself is finished but creative power is still active. Were it not thus, nothing would exist. This power is called "eternal power" in contrast to the power of man. What a difference! Look at what man's power can do. He constructs a building, then you come to see it a few thousand years later and it is nothing but a ruin. Is that power? When God builds something, it does not fall into ruin. No, in the universe, the sun still shines, the moon continues to give its light, the stars sparkle with the same brightness as at their creation; the "cords of Orion" (@Job 38: 31) have not been loosed. God calls the man who shuts his eyes to all this a fool -- "The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God" (@Psalm 14: 1).
Now, I want to speak about "the power of his resurrection", about the power which is active in His resurrection, not about the power which operated in the past, as a fact of history, but about the power which
{288}
operates now. History is only in books; there is no active power in history. The resurrection of Christ is not simply a historical fact. It is an active power, which operates today on the earth. Paul says, 'I want to know this power and I am ready to lose everything else to know it'. After His resurrection, the Lord Jesus spent forty days on the earth; He was "seen" by his disciples "during forty days" (@Acts 1: 3). Is not that a proof? For forty days He assembled with the disciples, who saw Him as a Man beyond death. They felt the power of His resurrection while He assembled with them and spoke to them. It was clear to them that nothing could limit His power, not even doors closed through fear of the Jews. He was able to place Himself in the midst of His disciples, to manifest Himself to them and to disappear from them during these forty days. The world cannot provide such indisputable proofs as these. The modern doctrines of the religious world cannot prove their arguments in such a way.
I wish to speak to you about this power. In the Scriptures it is called "the surpassing greatness of his power" (@Ephesians 1: 19), which "he wrought in the Christ
{289}
in raising him from among the dead". It is greater than the power of creation; it is surpassingly great; it surpasses everything. The sun, the moon and the stars express the eternal power of God but not the surpassing greatness, which is seen in the resurrection of Christ. The apostle says that this power "works in us" (@Ephesians 3: 20). What did this power do in respect of Jesus? It brought Him out of the tomb and put Him into another world. It did not put Him into heaven immediately but into a resurrection world down here for forty days. Now, the apostle says, 'I want to know this power'. Do you know something of it? It is a power which, in a similar way, is available to you to elevate you from what obtains at present and down here into another world, outside this scene of death which surrounds us. Scripture speaks of those who, while living, are dead -- the man who does not know Christ is dead while living. This resurrection power, however, can make us live in another world now. All this is implied in the resurrection of Jesus. This is what it did for Paul.
Before considering what we have read in Mark and Luke, I should like to ask a question -- if Christ is raised from among
{290}
the dead, why did He go into death; why did He die? I wonder what the answer of each heart here might be to this question. Why did He, who must be raised from among the dead, have to pass through death? Why was He hung on the tree? Why was He crucified? Why did He lay down His life? Why was He buried?
In order to answer questions such as these, other questions have to be considered and I ask you 'Why do you have to die?' Some would say that it is our debt to nature. That is not true. If men die, the Scriptures give the reason for it -- death is the wages of sin, as it says, "For the wages of sin is death" (@Romans 6: 23). God is always righteous; He sees to it that each receives his wages. So when will you be paid? When will you receive your wages? Perhaps your payment day will be tomorrow. You do not know how long you will still have to wait. When your day comes, you will receive your wages. That is why men die -- they have deserved it. Why did Jesus die? He did not merit these wages, He says, "Which of you convinces me of sin?" (@John 8: 46). Who can convince Jesus of sin? The
{291}
truth is that He never sinned and that He did not deserve the wages of sin.
So why did He die? It is what you deserved. You deserved to be hanged, to be eternally under God's curse, because that is what it means to be hanged -- "Cursed is everyone hanged upon a tree" (@Galatians 3: 13). That is what you deserved -- death. The sentence pronounced at the beginning was, "for in the day that thou eatest of it thou shalt certainly die" (@Genesis 2: 17). And that is not all. You also deserve to be buried, because you dishonour the earth. You are unworthy to be seen here. It is what God said to man at the beginning. "For dust thou art; and unto dust shalt thou return" (@Genesis 3: 19).
Why did the Lord Jesus accept all that when He was hanged on the tree, when He was under God's curse, when He laid down His life and was buried? Do you have an answer to this question? Paul tells us that it is for us "...that Christ died for *our sins*, according to the Scriptures; and that he was buried" (@1 Corinthians 15: 3, 4). It was *for us* that He was made a curse by God. Does He not, then, have a place in your heart? Is He not great enough to fill your heart? The Lord had said, "...and I, if I be
{292}
lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me" (@John 12: 32). He said that to indicate the death by which He would die, the death of the cross. In taking this place, "up out of the earth", He desired to attract every human heart to Him. Are you ignoring this? Can you ignore a crucified Saviour? If you reject Him, you will have to take what you deserve. What would you do if the moment were to come when you find yourself under curse, when you die and, after having been buried, you appear before God in judgment? These are your wages. It says of Christ, "But now once in the consummation of the ages he has been manifested for the putting away of sin by his sacrifice" (@Hebrews 9: 26).
Returning to the subject of "the power of his resurrection", the power by which He left the tomb is that which operates at present in the soul of the believer and which will operate in you, if you believe in Jesus. A Christian is a man who lives in the joy of another world. You may notice that he does not seek sport, the cinema, novels, newspapers or money. He seems to be dead to all that. He is indeed dead to this world but he lives in another world. What has happened to him? "The power of his resurrection"
{293}
has raised this man out of the world of death and has put him into another world. I do not mean into heaven but into another world, down here on the earth. He is still here but he lives in another world. It is a wonderful world, which will last for ever. God spoke of it, saying, "...yea, the world is established, it shall not be moved" (@Psalm 93: 1). You can do nothing against a man who is in the power of resurrection; he is beyond your reach. Do you think that Pilate would have been able to do anything against Jesus during the forty days? He was able to disappear from before their eyes. Indeed, although He was here, men of the world never saw Him. He was seen by above five hundred brethren at once but the world never saw Him. That is the position of the Christian. Don't you feel the appeal of leaving this world in order to enter God's world?
Let us look now at what the power of His resurrection can do for you. It is with this end in view that I have read the passages in Mark and Luke. You come to the sepulchre of Jesus; the stone is rolled away. You say, 'That was to allow Jesus to come out'. Not at all; it is to allow you to look into the sepulchre. He came out without the stone having been rolled away.
In Mark's gospel, in the
{294}
sepulchre there is "...a young man sitting on the right, clothed in a white robe..." (@Mark 16: 5). He addresses the women and says to them, "He is risen, he is not here ... But go, tell his disciples and Peter, he goes before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him, as he said to you" (@Mark 16: 6, 7). Who is this young man? May God work so that it might be you! On this same earth where Christ had been crucified and buried, there is a young man in all the energy of youth. He is clothed in white, in purity. Only a young man or a young woman in the joy of resurrection is marked by purity. They take the place, in the power of resurrection, which Jesus had taken. This young man is sitting actually in the tomb, he is not afraid. What allows him to sit there? "The power of his resurrection." He understands the resurrection and knows its present power in such a way that he can be seated in the same place as where Christ had been buried. He was sitting on the right, which is the side of power. This young man is marked by purity, by peace and by power. How can he be thus in the tomb? By "the power of his resurrection." This young man's secret is that he is in contact with Jesus. He says, 'He is not here;
{295}
He will never again be in the tomb but I know where He is. I am in contact with Him, a living Man beyond death; I know Him; I love Him.' This young man knows a power, which is far superior to all the powers of this world -- "the power of his resurrection." It keeps a man youthful; anyone who knows it will never grow old. As to his body, naturally, he will age but never as to his spirit. He will always be pure, for he has washed his robe. He is always tranquil, always at peace. He knows where to find power -- at the right hand. He knows where Jesus is; do you? You say, 'He is in heaven.' That is true, He is in heaven, but it is not the whole truth. He is in Galilee. The young man says, "...he goes before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him..." (@Mark 16: 7). If you do not go to Galilee, you will never see Jesus. That is where He is now, in this world's reproach. The word Galilee means the reproach of the world. The world does not want men like this; they are called Galileans. Every true Christian is a Galilean, reproached and rejected in the world. But Jesus is there, in Galilee, and the young man says to the women, "...there shall ye see him..." That is the test. If you could find Jesus in the world, there would be no test,
{296}
but you will never find Him there. He is held in contempt and if you wish to find Him, you will have to accept reproach. This is our present position -- we "go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach" (@Hebrews 13: 13). This world is going to disappear soon and God's world will be manifested. Christ will no longer be scorned; He will be seated on His throne of glory, having with Him in His glory all those who have gone into Galilee to find Him. Will you be there? The power of His resurrection leads men to Galilee, where they will be scorned by the world but where they will find Jesus.
I shall add a few words on what we have read in Luke. It is the same place as in Mark, the sepulchre. When the women entered, they noticed that Jesus was not there but it says, "...two men suddenly stood by them in shining raiment" (@Luke 24: 4). It is no longer *one* young man but *two* men who stood *by* the women, which suggests fellowship in the very presence of death. Several people are there, together in the light of another world. This is what results after you have believed in Jesus, that you are transferred from darkness into His wonderful
{297}
light. You enter into fellowship with the people of God in that world. What marks these two men is that they have shining garments. It is no longer a white robe. These two men have shining clothes, clothing which is radiant with heavenly colours. The clothes of these men are in accord with those of Jesus. They are reminiscent of the vest of many colours, which Jacob made for Joseph. Joseph is a type of Christ passing through this world, clothed in this wonderful vest but hated by his brethren. His vest was taken off and stained with blood; it carried the mark of death. The beauties of this vest, however, re-appear not only on Joseph but on these two men. They are there in "shining raiment". How did they come to be dressed in this way? by "the power of his resurrection." This excellent power clothed them in garments, which were entirely different. They left their soiled garments in Jesus¬ tomb, as God says, "Take away the filthy garments from off him" (@Zechariah 3: 4). They are now clothed in the character of Christ. It is one of the most striking spectacles in the world. It has been my joy to see more than two persons in this country clothed in shining raiment, reflecting some of the features of
{298}
Christ's exceptional beauty. Clothing refers to the way in which you appear in public. I cannot read your heart or your mind but I can see your garments. Here are two men in the shining raiment of the light of the glory of heaven. They received these clothes as a result of "the power of his resurrection".
This was the apostle's great desire. He renounced everything of this world; he said, "but what things were gain to me these I counted, on account of Christ, loss. But surely I count also all things to be loss ... that I may gain Christ ... to know him, and the power of his resurrection ... if any way I arrive at the resurrection from among the dead." This was the apostle's desire. He says, 'I have not yet reached this but it is what I want to achieve; I want to reach the resurrection from among the dead *now*; I want to live *now* in the power of His resurrection; this is my great goal; this is the only thing which I have before me.' Many of us pursue five or six different goals. Our great goal may be our business, perhaps our pleasures or something else and there may be only very little desire for Christ. To the extent that this may be so,
{299}
we shall never reach resurrection down here; we shall know little or nothing of His power. Paul says, "but one thing", *one* single thing, with the object of reaching resurrection now and here below. The power of the resurrection of Christ can realise this for us now; it does so for thousands of persons. The power of His resurrection is as active today as His creatorial power. Is the excellent greatness of God's power exhausted? His creatorial power is undiminished and His power in resurrection is greater than the power revealed in creation; it will never be exhausted. I commend this power to you. It is great enough to raise your soul, your heart and your mind into God's world.
