{#GOD'S DWELLING}
{5}
GOD'S DWELLING
@1 Timothy 6: 13-16; @Deuteronomy 33: 13-16; @Isaiah 57: 15; @1 John 4: 7-13
One felt, dear brethren, that the Lord might help us to consider the subject of where God dwells. The great goal of divine activities is to have conditions that God can dwell in, and that for ever. Nothing could exceed the blessedness of an eternity marked by God dwelling with men. I trust we have all tasted, at least for a few moments, the joy of God being with us -- the happiest moments of our lives! But think, dear brethren, of an eternity marked by this wonderful blessedness -- "the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will *dwell* with them." There will be a new heaven and a new earth -- a heaven no longer defiled by Satan, the father of lies, but cleansed and new, with all Satan's unholy influences gone for ever. And a new earth -- no wonder the prophet exclaimed, "O earth! earth!" -- the earth stained by sin and corruption, the earth which opened to receive the blood of Abel -- these things will have disappeared never to return; but instead, God is going to be with men. How blessed to think of! And the apostle Peter says we look for it -- we do! more earnestly than ever we did. "A new
{6}
heaven and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness."
And so I thought the Lord might help us to speak together of where God *now* dwells. God is pleased in His grace to approach men in spite of their condition. He did not leave Adam alone when he had sinned; He drew near to Adam. Later on, when men were busy building Babel, God said, "Let Us go down" -- not dwell, but go down. But God has in mind that, before the eternal day, we should know what it is to have God dwelling with us. "Will God indeed dwell with men?" Solomon with true wisdom says, "The heaven of heavens cannot contain Thee." I am sure the Lord would desire to give us all a deeper sense of the greatness of God. Timothy says, "He dwells in unapproachable light" in a sphere beyond the heavens. What a wonderful sense of altitude the heavens give us, do they not? Think of the first heaven, the second heaven, the third heaven, and *all* the heavens, and the heaven of heavens, and beyond that there is still a sphere where God has His essential abode. "Whom no man hath seen," ever inscrutable, none can look into it, none can approach where God dwells essentially. He dwelt there before there were any heavens or the earth. God, in His own abode! What was in that domain? No man can tell beyond what the precious Scriptures have revealed, and that is
{7}
very little. *God* was there, and in the Godhead there was distinction of Persons, and love existed there as between Divine Persons. I do not know that Scripture tells us much more. "To Whom be glory for ever. Amen."
Isaiah speaks of the "High and Lofty One," and God would have us grow in the sense of this, for it remains eternally true. Then, "Who inhabits eternity," another of His dwelling-places; He does not live in time. *We* live in time, and God has divided time up into gradations we can take in; we live in minutes, hours, days, years, and so on. But He, Himself, inhabits eternity -- He *lives* in eternity. Yet He takes great account of time, for it says, "When the fulness of the time had come, God sent forth His Son." And "in due *time*, Christ died for the ungodly." Isaiah adds that the high and lofty One, who inhabits eternity, dwells -- "and with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit." Put these two together, "the high and lofty One" and *also* "the contrite and humble spirit." God wants each one of our hearts and spirits to be His dwelling-place. He wants to live in our hearts as individuals. Do we want it? Think of it! He desires *also* to have a place in your heart. But He will not live *anywhere* -- you would not if you could help it. In His grace He approaches men, but He will not come and *live* in unsuitable conditions. But these conditions suit Him always
{8}
-- a humble and contrite spirit. God is very sensitive as to where He dwells, but if there are the conditions in one heart, God says, "I will come and live there." You do not wonder the apostle Paul could speak of God being with him, for what a humble and contrite spirit marked him -- the contrition of his heart got deeper and deeper as he reviewed what had marked him in the past. Do *we* forget it? God never wants us to forget it. I do not think we would have much difficulty in getting on together if this spirit marked us. The apostle could say, "Sinners, of whom I am the chief," "I persecuted the church." He was of a humble spirit, too -- he could say, "I, who am less than the least of all saints." So we need to continually judge the movements of pride. If we depart from a contrite and humble spirit, God will not *live* with us. He will come to us and speak to us, but He will not *dwell* with us.
To have God with us is the very greatest thing possible. If we are self-sufficient, self-important, we lose the presence of God.
In @Deuteronomy 33 we get a wonderful statement "The goodwill of Him Who dwelt in the bush." There is a great lesson in that if we are going to serve the saints. This incident came just as Moses was going out to serve, after much education leading up to it; this was his final lesson, so to speak. And we cannot serve if we do not
{9}
travel this way, and learn that He dwells in the bush; that His goodwill is such that He will come and live in the bush -- a thorn bush! Will God dwell there? The thorn, as we know, is the proof that the bush has been affected by sin; and Moses sees the bush, and it is in the fire; but the bush is living and not consumed, because of the goodwill of Him Who dwelt there. I know the Lord's people have got thorns, but God loves them and would dwell in them. He was not in the fire, but in the bush, and He spake out of the *bush*. People may go through all that the fire represents, testings and discipline of many kinds, but they do not perish, because God dwells in the bush. Moses says, "Yea, He loved the people," and Moses had learnt to love the people, too. After going through much trial on account of them, and having been spoken against so bitterly, "As for this man we wot not what has become of him," and after their idolatry, he says, "Forgive them -- if not, blot me out" -- he had imbibed some of that same goodwill.
Dear young men, and older brothers and sisters too, who want to serve the Lord, let this sink into your heart, that the Lord loves His people, even though they are thorny and weak. He wants you to see this great sight so that you will not be weary in your service. Moses departs blessing the people, and speaks of the goodwill of Him that dwelt in the bush.
{10}
And now a word about the last scripture. Not only does God want to give us as individuals the sense of Him dwelling in our hearts, but He wants to give us as together, dear brethren, the consciousness that He is dwelling with us. When you look at the Lord, you can understand that everything in that wonderful Vessel was according to God. It says, "God was in Christ." That blessed Man was His perfect abode, as suitable as the light unapproachable. Matthew tells us His name is "God with us." Let the sweetness and fragrance of every act of Jesus so shine into our hearts! God's dwelling-place was here in Jesus -- God expressed in His every act. It would revolutionise Scripture if we took this more into our hearts -- God is there! What a theme for the Gospel! As one of our hymns puts it --
"Sinner, see thy God beside thee,
In a servant's form come near."
But John says, "If we love one another, God dwells with *us*." Individually we require a contrite and humble spirit, and this cannot be altered. In the same way love is essential collectively. What is love? We often have wrong thoughts about it. It is firstly expressed in obedience, and then sacrifice -- the two great expressions of love. When we think of the love of God, we cannot apply obedience, but "in this was manifested the love of God, that He sent His Son." What sacrifice! beyond all words can
{11}
tell. But looking at the Lord Jesus as a man, we see love expressed in two ways. He expressed His love towards God in that "He became obedient unto death," and then secondly, "Hereby perceive we love -- He laid down His life for us." What a sacrifice!
Do we want God with us? dear brethren. We do, I am sure. We shall have it on these two lines -- obedience first of all to the Lord, subjection to Him and subjection to one another. But someone says, "*I* think -- " You will lose the presence of God on that line. Let the younger be subject to the elder, and obey them that -- have the rule over you -- the first great feature of love. This is love, to keep His commandments, and they are not grievous. The next great feature is sacrifice. I cannot tell you tonight the various ways in which sacrifice is available to us. I would speak to the young ones -- if you want God with you it must be on the line of sacrifice. If we have nothing else, we have a body. What are we doing with it? The apostle says, "I beseech you ... that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice." So where there is obedience and sacrifice amongst the saints, God dwells with us.
What is going to mark the new heavens and the new earth is to be with us now -- a touch of eternity. These things are not known by the study of theology; they are not forms, but realities. Externally, there was *nothing* that Laodicea
{12}
lacked, but the Lord was outside and standing at the door. One dreads Laodiceanism. It is the danger of the present moment to have everything externally and not have the Lord. I appeal to, us all. Obedience, sacrifice, and God is with us -- nothing can replace that. He sees into our hearts, our motives, our ways. If we love one another, we get His presence.
Let these two features be with us in Melbourne or Sydney or anywhere, and God is with us. One just desires to leave these thoughts with us as to where God dwells, ever remembering, in a spirit of worship, that there is a sphere above all heavens where is His eternal abode. And *never* forget that God dwells in the bush. And as to ourselves as set together: "If we love one another, God dwells in us."
May the Lord help each one of us!
{13}
GOD'S WORKS
@Genesis 2: 7; @Genesis 3: 19; @Genesis 5: 1, 2; @John 9: 1-12; @1 Kings 7: 40-47
No doubt, dear brethren, most of us have observed that God from the outset has had two spheres in His mind -- one called the heavens and the other called the earth. This is indicated in the first verse in scripture, "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth." It is continued in the eternal condition, so that the writer of the Revelation says, "I saw a new heaven and a new earth." God has arranged that there should be various elevations in the heavenly sphere -- these are the heavens, He Himself having His glory in its fullest sense above the heavens. But in the sphere of creation, looking at it for the moment as one whole, there are evidently various elevations. God has chosen us according to His eternal purpose to be heavenly -- to bear the image of the heavenly. "As is the heavenly one, so also are the heavenly ones."
But I wanted tonight, with the Lord's help, to speak about the earth -- a sphere much lower than the heavens in every sense -- and what God is doing on *earth*, and something that has come
{14}
to light on *earth*. In @Genesis 5, when God made man, male and female, He called *their* name Adam. When God names anything, nothing can improve on nor nothing alter the name given. The beginning of Genesis is wonderful in that regard in the way God names things. He called the light day, and darkness night -- He gave them each a name. "Let there be an expanse" -- what majesty! an expanse none of us is capable of measuring, and He called the expanse Heaven. Then God said, "Let the dry land appear," and He called it Earth, and the waters He called Seas. These are God's doings. Then when He made man, male and female, He called their name Adam -- Adam means *earth*. I feel it is important to press this, dear brethren, as we read, "Dust thou art," made out of the ground, out of this lowly condition in contrast to the heavens. Heaven is not earth, the stars are not earth, angels are not earth, but He called *their* name Adam, meaning *earth*, indicating the lowly condition that marks man in himself. Previously He had said, "Let the earth bring forth the living creature," creeping things, four-footed beasts, as well as the trees and the herbs, etc. -- all came out of the earth, and then God says, "Out of the ground wast *thou* taken -- Adam." Elihu confirms this in a wonderful way -- he shows, of course, that man is not *all* earth -- man's swelling pride would go if he were to read
{15}
this chapter: "The Spirit of God hath made me,, and the breath of the Almighty hath given me life." God breathed into man the breath of life -- the breath of the Almighty has been breathed into man's lowly condition, so that man is capable of having to do with God consequently. Elihu says, "I also am formed out of the clay." If all would face this it would keep us humble, that as being here on earth our name is Adam. What is dust cannot compass God -- it cannot compass heaven, much less Him Who is above the heavens. Hence how imperative that we should recognise what is inscrutable, what is unapproachable, what we cannot even draw near to. But God loves man -- "Let us make man." Job is a wonderful book; it says there: "God is mighty, and despiseth not any." Though man is earth, God does not despise man; indeed, man is the object of His purpose. It says, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man the things that God has prepared for them that love Him"; God has thoughts for man that the human mind never could have conceived.
In @John 9, the great point the Lord calls attention to is that God has permitted all that has come in, in His wisdom, in order that the works of God might be manifested in man, though so insignificant in himself. How will He do it? I think what the Lord did there is wonderful beyond expression. The Lord speaks of Himself
{16}
as coming into this world as "light," and it says, "*when* He had thus spoken, He spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle." The New Translation adds, "as ointment." The Lord brings before us here the wonderful truth and reality of incarnation. He makes an ointment of that which is a combination of His spittle and the ground, the most wonderful thing in the universe. The spittle refers to Himself personally; spittle is probably more personal than breathing even. It is what is essentially of Himself, coming into human conditions, coming into the ground. It is what He is personally coming into man's estate. This is how He brings God's works to pass. I believe, dear brethren, the Lord wants us to see more clearly than we have done, both His deity and His manhood. The "I am," the One who "*is* over all, blessed for evermore, Amen," but coming into the same condition as man is in -- the ground. Matthew tells us "a virgin shall be with child and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call His name Immanuel -- *God with us*." O dear brethren, let the might and glory of it into our souls -- God manifest in flesh! The Word who was *God* become flesh and dwelling amongst us -- what wonderful ointment! How different from Adam, wonderful as Adam was! God Himself -- none less -- coming into flesh. "As the children are partakers of flesh and blood, He also Himself took
{17}
part of the same" -- that is what I understand spitting on the ground means. But, dear brethren, this is what is called ointment. He made it as a means of healing. This is the divinely appointed ointment for the removal of the darkness, even from a man who was *born* blind -- never heard of since the world began! What an ointment! God manifest in flesh! The great healing power of the universe -- it will heal everybody who will allow it to come upon his eyes.
You cannot put any limit upon such an ointment, can you? Not like the remedies of earth! Ointment is used to work within, to affect what is inside, "manifested in him." But literally, dear brethren, it made him darker than ever; it meant that for the moment if he were blind before he would be blinder still. Though the ointment in itself was powerful beyond telling, one thing is essential if it is to be operative, and that is subjection, subjection to the Lord. The Lord says, "*Go*, and *wash* in the pool of Siloam." The man might have said, "I am blind; how can I get there?" But he says, "I *went* and *washed*, and I received sight." Light as to the blessed person of Christ is inseparable from obedience and subjection. Unless we are prepared to be subject, we *do not* get the gain of even such ointment as this. Let us be prepared to obey the Lord at all costs. They said, "How
{18}
were thine eyes opened?" He says, "A man called Jesus." That was the point he had reached -- not very far, but he soon knows more. He says, "He is a prophet, He has the mind of God," and then later he says, "He is *of* God." They say, "We do not know"; and he says, "*Marvellous* thing that you do not know." They answer, "Thou wast altogether born in sins, and dost thou teach us?" and they cast him out. Jesus was just waiting for that moment, and He heard that they had cast him out and finds him. Obedience brings more light, for the Lord loves to find such. "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" He does not say, "I know everything"; but he says, "Who is He, Lord, that I might believe on Him?" I am ready for more light, Lord -- who is He? The blessed One who came into the clay, the One who is right alongside you and talking with you -- *He* is the Son of God, the One who in manhood declares God. "Lord, I believe," and he worshipped Him. How it shows the profound excellence of the ointment when coupled with obedience that makes a man *born blind* into a worshipper! What a wonderful thing to take place on earth! Job says the expanse is empty -- @Job 26: 7, N.T. (though some would tell us that there are people living on Mars); the *earth* is the sphere of the greatest of divine operations in this period, for it is here that incarnation has taken place.
{19}
One word more -- I would just like to refer to something else that is taking place on earth. The passage we read in 1 Kings refers to what Solomon the king did. He was preparing at that time vessels for the house of God -- the place where God would dwell, a place for the Ark. How great the Ark was in both David's and Solomon's minds! That lowly vessel represented to them something so great. And he proceeds to prepare the vessels, and he prepares them in such number that they were never weighed -- vessels many and varied -- and where were they prepared? "In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the *clay ground* between Succoth and Zaretan." It was the king, Solomon, a type of the One who is the wisdom of God and the power of God. How it would solve men's problems today if they had a Solomon! "God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea-shore." And so the true Solomon, with all the wisdom and power and resources that mark Him, is engaged now in casting vessels, innumerable vessels, of bright brass, in the clay ground. Think of all the saints right down the ages, vessels in that way, every one of them having a different service. He will use the earthly conditions of our lives at the present time down here on the plain of Jordan, that plain with the ashes of Sodom
{20}
and Gomorrah on the one side, and the river Jordan on the other ready to overflow its banks at any moment -- *there* are the vessels of bright brass cast for the temple of God. If we could only see this, it would help and encourage us with regard to the clay ground, all our earthly circumstances and even death, for David could say, "There is but a step between me and death."
You see it in Job. There he was in that plain -- what sorrows were his! His sons and daughters gone, his money gone, his cattle gone, his health gone, death but a step away -- in fact, his wife says to him, "Curse God and die." But the only wise God is casting in the clay ground a wonderful vessel of bright brass, in accord with the holiness of God. When the casting is over and the clay ground left behind, look at it! Job says, "I abhor myself" -- that is brass, bright brass, reflecting the holiness of God. God turned the captivity of Job when he prayed for his three friends, not when he repented, not when he abhorred himself, but when he prayed for his three friends. That was the completion of vessel -- a man like God. His three friends had spoken bitter and cruel things against him, but as the vessel comes out of the clay, he *prays* for them. If we have a sense that we are in captivity for the moment, going through intense exercise, spoken against unfairly -- can we pray? I don't
{21}
mean formal prayer in the prayer meetings, I mean the intense longing in the heart for the blessing of those who have spoken against us.
The true Solomon is doing this with us all -- in wisdom baffling to the natural mind -- our circumstances used as a mould in which He will form vessels that correspond with the holiness of God.
Stephen stands right on the banks of the Jordan, the river about to come up and remove the clay ground altogether, and there comes out a vessel suitable to God, bright brass -- you can look into it and see the character of heaven reflected -- "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge"; not a trace of hatred, not a trace of bitterness or resentment in his spirit, but a blessed vessel for the temple of God -- one of those innumerable vessels that cannot be weighed for number.
We see it in Paul, too. What a mould he had been formed in! At the hands of the Jews, his brethren, he had five times received forty stripes save one; thrice was he beaten, once stoned, and so on, yet he could say in Rome, "Not that I have anything to accuse my nation of." Not one accusation to make -- what a vessel! Accusing is the Devil's work; let us leave it to him. The work of Christ is to intercede for the brethren. I beg you all, dear brethren, and myself too, to face this out -- am I secretly accusing the brethren, or am I retiring into the secret of the
{22}
presence of God and praying for them? Do not take the edge off it, and do not turn it on to someone else.
The Lord help us to get the gain of the clay ground in the plain of Jordan, with the skill of the true Solomon using it to form innumerable vessels, in great variety and of immeasurable weight, to adorn the dwelling-place of God.
As to our estate as connected with the earth, God called *their* name Adam -- man in his strength and woman in her beauty. So that we should not boast in the strength of man, nor in the beauty of woman. But here on earth the wonder of incarnation has taken place: God manifest in flesh -- the effective ointment to open eyes that never have seen.
And the earthly circumstances of our lives are the mould in His hands to form something that is not earth, but bright brass, ready for the day of display.
May He help us to know our own nothingness, and more of the greatness of that blessed Person who has come into manhood.
{23}
"LEST WE OFFEND"
@Matthew 17:1-5, @Matthew 17:24-27; @Matthew 18:1-10, @Matthew 18:15-20; @Acts 10:9-16, @Acts 10:34-38, @Acts 10:44-48
What I have in mind to speak a little about, dear brethren, might be summed up in what might be called divine interruptions. On each of the three occasions of which we read, we find God, or the Lord, interrupting Peter; each of them refers to Peter, and hence would indicate something of great importance. For God is the God of patience, and indeed this marks Divine Persons in dealing with men. This is witnessed in a wonderful way with Job. Think of how God waited for Job -- Job and his three friends went on speaking, as recorded in chapter after chapter, and Job goes on till he finishes, and then, as it were, he puts his signature to all he has said, and signs it. (@Job 31: 35. New Trans.) And then he continues his self-justification -- a word or two more: "If my land cry against me, or the furrows likewise thereof complain, if I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or have caused the owners thereof to lose their life: let thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley. The words of Job are ended." And God does not speak till Job finishes, nor His representative Elihu. The words of Job were ended, and the words of his three friends
{24}
were ended, and *then* Elihu speaks for God, longing to speak, "as wine which hath no vent -- ready to burst like new bottles," and says "I will answer thee -- God is greater than man." Then when Elihu has finished, God speaks: "Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?" "Will you condemn Me that you might be righteous?" God been listening day after day, day after day, until Job had finished, showing that when God does *not* wait till man is finished, it is of such importance that it is worthy of our profound attention.
While Peter was *speaking*, God interrupts him. God speaks; He does not wait for Peter to finish. Then when Peter refers to the Lord paying tribute, it says: "The Lord *anticipated* Peter" -- did not wait for Peter to begin speaking. And in Acts, while Peter was *speaking*, God acts. One desires that the Lord might give us some impression of what is behind this. I do not want to dwell much on the Mount of Transfiguration tonight -- wonderful scene! that has often brought worship from the hearts of the saints. But what I wanted to dwell on a little was that Peter says, "It is good for us to be here; if Thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles, one for Thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias," as indeed Mark says, "not knowing what he said." God wants us to know what we say when we speak in the Divine presence.
{25}
Peter overlooks and does not preserve the unique glory of Christ "one for Thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias," and *while* he was speaking a voice came out of the cloud: "This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye Him." One feels, dear brethren, the Lord is helping us as to the unique glory of Christ -- nothing and no one must be put on the same platform as Christ. The tabernacle was built for the Ark, and the Ark is Christ. So we can see from the interruption of Peter that God *will* come in to secure in our hearts the unique pre-eminence of Christ. This has been so all down the history of the church; you find constantly the Spirit of God is intervening to preserve in our hearts the unique and special place of Christ. He does not stand on the same platform as even the greatest servant of Christ.
Let us follow on a little with regard to Peter's statement lower down in the chapter. They come to Peter and ask, "Does your Master pay tribute?" and he says, "Yes," without any qualification. Peter has just been one of the three on the Mount -- he has seen the Lord's face shine as the sun. What power, what glory, what majesty we see in the sun! -- an expression of kingship according to God -- it rules the day. And the Lord's face had been seen by Peter, as the sun shining in all its brilliance. And they come and say, "Does your Master pay tribute?"
{26}
And Peter says, "Yes." Do you think the Lord is going to let that pass? Then Peter has seen His raiment as white as the light -- what blessed purity marked His garments, so different from ours! for, dear brethren, we all recognise that we are part of those who have *washed* their robes and *made* them white. We have to wash *every action* -- I do not think there is one action, speaking generally, but needs some sort of cleansing as to our motive, our object. But Peter sees One whose raiment was white as the light, and they come to him and say, "Does your Master pay tribute?" Peter says, "Yes." He had heard a voice. "Such a voice from the excellent glory." I have no doubt that no one had ever heard a voice like that -- not only that the words were wonderful, but *such* a voice -- a voice that disclosed the supreme place that the Son of God had in the affections of the Father. We who are parents of children know a little of the way a father would speak to his son -- such a voice, only infinitely greater: "This is My beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; hear Him." And they come and say, "Does your Master pay tribute?" "Yes." Peter had heard on the Mount that the Lord must be the speaker and all must listen to Him. Then they come down from the mountain, and a mighty demon is there, one that the Lord speaks of as *this* kind -- there were some manifestly more powerful than others.
{27}
Peter sees this blessed One rebuke the demon and cast him out. They say, "Does your Master pay tribute?" and Peter says, "Yes." The Lord could not let that pass, and He anticipates Peter. Our Master is under tribute to *no one*; you might as well say the sun is under tribute. Could men demand tribute of the sun? Think of Peter saying "Yes." "Then," says the Lord, "are the sons *free*." You *can't* claim from sons, only from strangers. The Lord will not allow anything to pass that is derogatory to His Person. And then He says something which is one of the most wonderful statements in scripture: "Lest we offend," and, linking Peter with Himself, says, "for Me and thee." Then another ray of wonderful glory shines out -- He says, "Go to the sea and cast an hook and take up the fish that first cometh up" -- all is in His hands. How this would have brought home to Peter how wrong he was -- the One who had everything in His hand, even to each fish! Dear brethren, let the light of that into our hearts, "lest we offend." This glorious One whose face has shone as the sun, whose raiment was white as the light, to whom a voice had come from the excellent glory, "Hear Him," this One who has control of the powers of darkness and can order demons to leave, and who holds the waters in His hands, could say, "Lest we offend." He would render what none had title to claim rather
{28}
than offend, and links Peter with Him -- "for Me and thee." How different is Christ to the natural man! He would not offend any, and He wants Peter to see the position clearly, and be like Him.
And then follows a great deal of instruction about not offending -- nearly a chapter under the blessed influence of this One Who says, "Lest we offend." He takes a little child and puts him in the midst, and warns against offending such. The seriousness of offending such is so great that, "better for him that a mill stone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea." And then the Lord says, "If thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee" -- the Lord wants His people to be marked by non-offence like Himself. If necessary, the movements of our hands should be limited rather than offend -- whatever we do with our hands, write letters maybe, do we offend? The One who was *so* great says, "Lest we offend." Dear brethren, let us consider it when our hands move, when we begin some activity with our hands, let us read this: "Lest we offend," "Me and thee," is the Lord's desire in this connection! And our feet, the path we tread, the places we go to, the movements of the saints, are they giving offence? Accept restriction rather than do that. And our eyes, our outlook; better to be
{29}
limited than have an outlook which is damaging to ourselves and others. The Lord would have correspondence to Himself with every saint, "Me and thee," to be true. It is worth suffering, worth having one hand, one foot, one eye go, if "Me and thee" is true, in not giving offence.
Now you can see clearly the great power of what follows -- "If thy *brother* shall trespass against thee." An individual who has travelled such a road as has been indicated and does not give offence at any cost, when he comes to see the brother who has trespassed against him, what power he will have! So often we have given offence, spoken bitter words, etc. If the brother will not hear *him*, then take one or two more like that -- what power then! and then the whole assembly, if necessary, all marked by non-offence on their side. If he will not hear the assembly, then "let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican." If a person would not hear Christ, there is no hope for him, and the assembly normally is like Him. Each member like Him, not just a number of human beings in a room, not merely those who know the Lord even, but characterised by the Spirit of Christ. If he will not hear the assembly, then that is the final word. Dear brethren, what I feel we want is the power that goes with non-offence on our part, the Spirit of the One in @Matthew 17, who said, "lest we offend," "give it for Me and thee."
{30}
Well, one would just add a word about @Acts 10. The Father interrupts Peter on the mount, saying, "This is My beloved Son." The Lord Himself anticipates Peter so that he should understand something of the true position of Christ and the spirit of non-offence expressed in "Me and thee"; but here the Holy Spirit interrupts. It says, "While Peter yet *spake*, the Holy Ghost fell on all those who heard the word." That wonderful movement in the latter part of Acts was something Peter never reckoned upon, and in order that Peter should be prepared for it, he became in an ecstasy. Do we go up into the house-top to pray? That is where ecstasies come -- above the level of our own things; not that one would belittle praying about our own affairs for one moment, but this is above the level of our own things; we move up in our outlook in relation to what is of God, of heaven. So Peter is prepared with an ecstasy, and then a sheet comes down from heaven, indicating that heaven is moving, and in the sheet Peter sees four-footed beasts, wild beasts, creeping things and fowls of the air. And Peter says in answer to the word -- kill and eat, "Not so, Lord." He had never eaten creeping things in his life, not one; or yet wild beasts, and he never reckoned that God could *cleanse* wild beasts. How patient the Lord is as the Teacher! "What God has cleansed, that call not thou common," and this
{31}
was done three times. Then come Cornelius¬ messengers, and later Peter begins to speak, and *while* speaking the Holy Ghost fell on all those who heard. *Fell* is a word which indicates affection, not like the *fall* of Babylon; but we get it in Luke where the Father ran and *fell* on the son's neck. What one observed was that while Peter was speaking there is indicated the joy heaven has in embracing the Gentiles. Even then, Peter doesn't quite accept the position, and speaks in a negative way: "Can any man forbid water?" But *God* acted, and he could say later, "Who was I, that I could withstand *God*?" What I think we can see in this is the delight of heaven in the extension of the word of God. Sometimes heaven acts quickly. The Father ran. As we get nearer the end, and we are undoubtedly near it, I think we have to be prepared for heaven to act directly, and to act quickly. We must not limit God -- we must not limit God or the Spirit. God will maintain till the end the unique place of Christ. If any of us speak in a way that is derogatory to Christ, heaven will interrupt, and God will make clear *His* thoughts of His beloved Son. Though we are linked with Him in many ways, He is unique, and we love it to be so. None can make *claims* on Christ, none can claim tribute from Him; but although He is *so* great, He will not offend. And this is the only way for *us* to take up difficulties
{32}
amongst us. And then there is the urgency of embracing the Gentiles. We love to think of it, for we are Gentiles ourselves -- heaven was urgent in bringing us in. May we have such a spirit in our hearts, that we long for an extension of His work, even in quarters that we hardly would have expected it -- to be *prepared* for divine activities.
{33}
FULNESS
@Isaiah 24: 1-12; @Colossians 2: 8-10; @Ephesians 1:7-10, @Ephesians 1:15-23
I have no doubt, beloved brethren, that most of us have in some way become conscious that God is beginning to overturn things here, with a view to emptying them -- with a view to emptying this world. It would appear from scripture that God always does that when a moral necessity for it arises. To go back to @Genesis 1: 2, it says the earth was *waste and empty*; though of course it is apparent, and indeed scripture declares, that God did not make it empty; He neither made it waste nor empty. It says, "In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth," and we are told that He did not make it empty. You cannot think of God making an empty earth. But something transpired which God has not seen fit to disclose to us that made it necessary to empty the earth, so that there came a moment when there was nothing here that was living -- not a blade of grass, not a plant, not an animal, not a responsible creature -- whatever may have been here before, which is not disclosed to us; but because of some moral ruin, which no doubt originated from the devil,
{34}
something transpired, and God turned it upside down and emptied it. That is no doubt why there is buried in the bowels of the earth evidences to this day of animal and vegetable life often different to anything existing today. I do not dwell on the physical side, except to point out that when God empties anything, something has happened to call for it. It says of the flood in the days of Noah, "The windows of the heavens were opened, and the foundations of the great deep were broken up"; behind the physical overthrow there was the moral condition -- that called for it. Then God emptied the earth, except for a few -- even eight souls were saved -- by water. Again you have the same thing in Sodom and Gomorrah; God emptied those cities; God turned them into ashes; condemned them with an overthrow, not because of a physical accident; no, never. God never acts like that; but in His all-power and all-wisdom He disturbs, the physical, owing to a moral necessity. So, with these cities, there was a moral state that called for "fire and brimstone," which is proved by God coming down. He says, "I have come down to see." Such is God. He came down to see if the cities could be spared; but when it was manifest that those cities could not continue, then there was a physical overthrow. They were turned into ashes. God has been pleased to disclose this to us. I have not the shadow of doubt
{35}
it lies behind all that God does. If you were to visit cities that God has overthrown by physical disturbance, and knew the inward history of those cities, you would find there was a moral necessity for the emptying. Men may say there was an eruption from Vesuvius that caused the overthrow of Pompeii. So there was; but the physical emptying corresponds with the moral necessity. I think that explains to us where we are today. God is beginning to empty man's world because of the moral state of things -- the abandonment of divine light and divine principles and divine limitations. God is *beginning* to empty the earth. We have not by any means reached the fulness of this. I have not a doubt God is beginning what we read about in @Isaiah 24, God empties the earth and turns it upside down, and in doing it He will see, as it says, that no one escapes that belongs to it. It is remarkable that it says, "As with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him." "As with the people, so with the priest" -- the religious leaders will not miss what God does. Those who take the place of priests in what is professedly of God -- "As with the people, so with the priest." Then it comes down the whole avenue of human
{36}
life; it touches all the great features of man's life here until, as the New Translation puts it in verse 12, the scene is a *ruin*. What is left when God overturns it is a ruin. That is what happened in Egypt. There was a moment when the time drew near for God to take His people out of Egypt; following their hatred, wickedness, and slavery of His people. God began to empty Egypt in various ways, until through the hail practically every green thing was smitten, and then followed the locusts that took off what was left; and the people of Egypt come to Pharaoh and say, "Don't you know that Egypt is ruined? Let these people go." That is what we have -- the approaching ruin or emptying of man's world. The Lord no doubt used these plagues to make Israel more ready to go. You can understand as they went out of the ruin how thankful their hearts would be to leave it behind, to move towards the land that flowed with milk and honey. Every true heart would appreciate the moving out of such a world.
I have no doubt the Lord is allowing us -- and if we are left here much longer, we shall taste much more of it -- to feel the emptying. You feel it in the religious world; how empty it is becoming! There was something once which we would not speak lightly of, but "as with the people, so with the priest." God is touching everything, and we feel it; He intends us to feel
{37}
it in view of taking us out of it, to realise that He is emptying what is already morally empty.
One desires not to speak about that so much, but to call attention to where the *fulness* is. You see, if we are going to taste much of the emptying before the Lord comes, God does not leave us without resource; and so one loves the expression in @Romans 15, verse 4: "That we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope" -- that as the emptying process goes on. God would bring us into touch with the fulness -- the fulness of which there is no limit. It was my desire to say a few words as to *fulness*.
It is a wonderful expression. You get it in relation to many things. You have this expression in the Psalms: "The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof." The *earth* is not the fulness; they are distinct. But what the fulness of the earth discloses is the *wonderful* resources of the earth. Think, dear brethren, of what comes out of the earth. Men may assume, in their pride, to despise the earth and agriculture, but even the king himself lives of the field. The king would die but for the field; so would everybody. Think of what a wonderful sphere the earth is, in distinction from the sea! Think of what comes out of the ground -- what God has put in the ground. We were noticing that we, ourselves, came out of the ground. There is
{38}
nothing in a human body but what comes out of the ground. Scientific men would admit that; there is not a single element in our bodies but what came from the ground. So with the cattle. God said, "Let the *earth* bring forth four-footed beasts and creeping things after their kind." What a wonderful thing the earth is! "Let the *earth* bring forth grass -- the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree," and so forth. The *earth* brought them forth. The power of God was exercised, of course, but the earth is the source. The *fulness* of the earth is all that comes out of the earth. So that we are not exactly intended to look at a lily and say, "What a wonderful lily!" but "What a wonderful earth!" We are to look at the lily and to consider it. But the point is not the *lily*, but the *earth*. The earth is the source of the lily. It says, "The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof." The *fulness* is everything that comes out of the earth.
Again it says, "Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof" (@1 Chronicles 16: 32). What a wonderful sphere the sea is! Think of what comes out of the sea! God said, "Let the sea swarm with living creatures after their kind." These wonderful creatures are innumerable; they have their origin in the sea; they come out of the sea -- in variety itself beyond us to understand; in number innumerable. The life in the sea cannot be conceived by the human mind. It
{39}
is not a question of looking at leviathan and saying, "What a wonderful animal it is!" but "What a wonderful thing the sea is that can bring forth these things!" The fulness of the sea has its origin in the sea. God says, "Let it roar." He wants man to hear it. He wants man to hear the witness of the sea and its fulness. You see thus His wonders.
I believe that helps us to understand what scripture means by "fulness" -- which is not the thing itself. The plant is not the earth, but it comes out of the earth. The fish are not the sea; they come out of it. They have their origin in the sea. Then what shall we say, dear brethren, of that wonderful passage in Colossians "In Him (Christ, the anointed Man) dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily"? We could *never* compass the fulness of the earth -- what has and does and will come out of the earth; we could never measure what comes out of the sea -- its fulness. But here in this wonderful passage we have something far greater than the fulness of the earth, far greater than the fulness of the sea; we have *all* the fulness of the Godhead -- all that that comes out of the Godhead. The fulness does not mean God, personally; but it means all that that flows out of the Godhead -- everything -- every attribute -- every feature that is proper to the Godhead, that finds its expression in the Godhead, dwells in
{40}
Him bodily, @Colossians 1: 19 says: "For it was pleasing that in Him should all fulness dwell" -- that is in the *past* tense; but in @Colossians 2: 9 it is *present*, it is there *now*. I believe that if we got the sense of that, we would rejoice to be put in touch with One in whom all the fulness of the Godhead dwells bodily! One could not speak of all the fulness of the Godhead. Think of what is proper to God! The fulness relates to what comes from God -- power, light, wisdom, patience, comfort ("God shall wipe all tears away" -- comfort is proper to God), stability (God is a Rock), faithfulness, every single thing that comes into expression because of what God is. The fulness of it all dwells in Him bodily. It dwells in that blessed Man to whom we belong; whose Spirit we have; who is head of His body, the assembly; so that the apostle says, "Ye are complete in Him." We have everything, because all that flows from God, what God is, in its entirety dwells in Christ bodily. It resides there *for ever*. It was here when He was here in lowly Manhood. It was pleasing that in Him all fulness should dwell. It is a wonderful expression -- that lowly dependent Man here on earth -- Jesus; it says, "It was pleasing"; it was one of the things that was pleasing to the Godhead, that all fulness should live there. What a sense of trustworthiness it
{41}
gives that God could deposit all His wisdom there. We often cannot be trusted with much; we are not great enough. All the Divine wisdom can dwell in that blessed Man; then power -- *all* power -- is given to Him in heaven and on earth. Think of such an One! The whole power of the Godhead -- eternal power -- can be vested in that blessed Man and *reside* there for ever. And patience; think of the patience of God! I do not think we have the faintest idea how to measure God's patience. We have no standard that can afford us a measurement of the patience that is proper to God -- the God of patience! Think of the patience of Christ! All the patience that is proper to the Godhead resides in Jesus. It was there when He was here, and is still there. Then mercy; compassion; faithfulness -- God is faithful; the totality of Divine faithfulness resides in Jesus. One could only suggest a little like that as indicating what is meant by *all the fulness*. As we look at the earth with all the trees, plants, herbs, it tells us what comes out of the earth; as we look at the features of Christ, it tells us the character of God, what flows from God. All the fulness is pleased to dwell in Him bodily. *Bodily*, I take it to mean in Him as Man. When you think of Him bodily, it is as having become Man, and as such He is the Vessel that holds eternally all the fulness of the Godhead. If the power and the joy of that came more into
{42}
our hearts, and we have to face a little more emptying, I think it would help us; we would be equipped for the emptying. I do not mean to say we would not feel it. In view of the breaking of links with this world. He intends us to feel it; but we have One in whom the fulness is. The apostle says, "Ye are complete in Him." You do not want philosophy, or vain deceit, or traditions of men; you want Christ because all the fulness of God dwells there.
I wanted to say a word or two as to Ephesians. You have another expression there that is full of the greatest instruction -- "the fulness of the times." One is impressed with God's condescension to speak to us of time. One who inhabits eternity, to whom time does not apply. His name is "I Am" -- not "I was," not "I will be," but eternally "I Am." Time does not in itself apply to God. But in His desire to teach us (scripture says, "Who teaches like Him"), He introduces time. He divides it into days, nights, weeks, months, years; into periods -- the millennium is one period. It says of Him: "A thousand years are as yesterday when it is passed and as a watch in the night." God introduces time and times. In God's dealings with His creatures there are various times. Job says, "Oh that times were treasured up before thee!" (N.T.) They are treasured; God took account of the times of man's ignorance; He overlooked
{43}
that. Then there was the "fulness of the time" when God sent forth His Son. What comes out of time is the appearance here of His Son. The great issue of time is the appearance of Christ. That is what God brought in time for. "When the fulness of the time was come God sent forth His Son ... that we might receive sonship" (@Galatians 4: 4). God created time to bring Christ in. That is the issue of it. There was another time God took account of from eternity; that was "the due time Christ died." It says "in the due time" -- a moment that was set apart by God in time, which He took account of to a day, to an hour -- that one day is divided into hours. It is called the *due time* when Christ should die. These things come out of time. They are part of what issues out of time -- the appearance of Christ in manhood.
In Ephesians we read: the dispensation of the fulness of the times -- that is, time broken into sections; a time for the testimony to be rendered is one, for instance -- that is the present time. There is also the fulness of the times. What comes out of the fulness of the times is this: there is going to be one period when everything in heaven and on earth is headed up in Christ -- not eternity. It will go into eternity. It refers to the coming day of the 1000 years. The fulness of times when everything that exists in the heavens -- angels, all the heavenly families,
{44}
of which there are many, including the church -- everything on earth all headed up in Christ. This will be the issue of all the times. There will be a time when everything in heaven and on earth comes under the living influence of Christ. What an issue! That is why God brought in time, to have a period of display and glory when Christ would give character to everything in heaven and on earth. Time is complete then -- it is no longer needed, and eternity goes on. I think that helps us to see the bearing of the fulness of time. Time may be like a moment; the whole period of time may seem a moment in relation to eternity. It is like the earth, the sea -- wonderful! God is infinitely wonderful. Time is wonderful. The earth is wonderful as shown in its fulness. The sea is wonderful as shown in all that comes out of it. God is wonderful; His name is wonderful -- shown in all that comes from Him, resident in the person of Jesus. Time is wonderful, for in time the blessed Son of God has appeared, and Christ has died. There will be a period when He has headship over everything.
There is one more feature of fulness, dear brethren, referred to in the last verse. The apostle speaks of the present exaltation of Christ (verses 19 to 23). I wonder what that means to some of our hearts? -- the assembly which is His body. I could not tell you how many members
{45}
there are in that body. I could not tell you how many members there are in my body; every one of them different; every one of them wonderful. The assembly which is His body is wonderful; we are of His flesh and His bones; His body -- a variety of members. It is wonderful to think of that -- each having a feature of its own, a service of its own. But, dear brethren, the point is this -- what a wonderful Person Christ is, that out of Him should come this fulness! I do not think it is meant to say, "What a wonderful vessel the church is!" It is wonderful; but the bearing is, "What a wonderful Person Christ is!" Out of Him comes all this fulness, composed of every member of the body of Christ. You look at them. You see Stephen. Stephen is part of the fulness. Everything that we look upon in Stephen and delight in came from Christ; he is part of the fulness of Him that filleth all in all. Then look at Phoebe: a servant of the church, quietly, silently, in oblivion and obscurity, patiently year by year serving the saints -- all that came from Christ. She is one of the members of the body; the fulness of Him that filleth all in all. Look at the work of God in the saints. Think of the Reformation, for instance. See men tied to a post and burnt; see them have their tongues cut out with red-hot pincers; yet they will not be untrue to the Lord. It is wonderful. It is part of the fulness. The
{46}
source is not the man himself; the source is Christ. So you look at the work of God today. Think of those the Lord has raised up patiently year by year in evil report and good, serving the saints, and teaching them. Where does it come from? It comes from Christ, the teacher. Patient continuance in well-doing has its origin in Christ. So it is with all the fulness. The whole assembly from Pentecost to the rapture composed of every *single member* is the fulness of Christ, having originated from no one but Christ. Take a blade of grass; the origin is not in the blade; the origin is in the earth. The fish is not the origin; the sea is the origin. Look at all that came out of Christ as Man; God is the origin. In Him is the fulness; God is the origin. Look at all that is in the assembly from first to last; it is the fulness of Him that filleth all in all.
One desires the Lord might impress us as we face the emptying of this world -- we are surely going to face it. There may be a lull for a moment, but we have to face it. We are at the door of the period that is going on and on until this present world is a ruin, as we read in @Isaiah 24: 12, N.T. Men hope and hope they can adjust things; but they cannot, because God has begun to empty the earth. How much we will taste of it before the Lord comes, I cannot say; but that is where we are -- at the beginning of the emptying of this world. The
{47}
Lord would help us to see where the fulness lies, available by the Spirit to the saints. We are in touch with the One Who gives character to the assembly, and so shall we be preserved as these things develop. None of the earth are going to escape, as it says, "as with the people, so with the, priest"; "as with the maid, so with the mistress."
May the Lord encourage our hearts to see the boundless resources we are in touch with by the power of the Spirit -- for His Name's sake!
{48}
GOD'S THOUGHTS
@Job 34:13-15; @Luke 1:1-4; @John 1:1-5, @John 1:14; @Revelation 19:11-21
I want, dear friends, to speak of some of God's thoughts. One is conscious that we could speak of very few tonight, for we are told by the Spirit of God that God's thoughts are innumerable; that they are precious. It says, "How precious are Thy thoughts ... how great is the sum of them" (@Psalm 139: 17). If we would count them, they are more than can be numbered; so that I could not speak of many in an hour; but with the Lord's help I trust there will come into our hearts some sense of the preciousness of God's thoughts, even if we only speak of one or two of them.
We are told that they are wonderfully elevated. It says, "As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are My thoughts than your thoughts" (@Isaiah 55: 9). I wonder how high the heavens are! You boys who go to school -- how high do you think the heavens are? I do not think anybody knows except God. The sun is said to be 93 million miles away. A man went up ten miles recently; that left 92,999,990 miles. And it was cabled all over the world that this
{49}
man had travelled up ten miles. Sirius is said to be 92 million million miles away; and I do not think we are in the third heaven then. God uses the heavens to teach us something of the elevation of His thoughts; they are not puny like our thoughts; they are *great* thoughts. "As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are My thoughts higher than your thoughts." God also says, "I *know* the thoughts that I think" (@Jeremiah 29: 11). We cannot know all that God thinks; indeed it says, "Who has known the mind of the Lord; who has been His counsellor?" (@Romans 11: 34). Do you think the wise men of this world gave God any counsel when He created the universe? The Spirit of God says, "Who has been His counsellor?" Man did not render counsel to God. God says, "I know the thoughts I think." And another thing, before I touch on what is in my mind; it says the thoughts of God will stand; ... "the thoughts of His heart for ever and ever." Man's thoughts keep crumbling. In yesterday's paper it was said that scientific men would have to revise many of their thoughts. They said last year positively, "This is a fact." Yesterday they said, "We were mistaken." What evidence that you cannot trust man's thoughts! Apart from everything else, death comes to the greatest thinker. It says, "In that day, his thoughts perish." He is gone; his thoughts have perished. It says of
{50}
God that the counsel of the Lord will stand, and the thoughts of His heart for ever and ever. So that it is well to take account of God's thoughts; to let go man's thoughts and to think of God's thoughts.
The passage I read in Job is full of instruction. The best rendering of that verse makes it a little clearer. It says if God only thought of Himself, and withdrew His Spirit and His breath, all flesh would perish altogether. Supposing God only thought of Himself from today (it is evident He has thought of others hitherto) -- but supposing God ceased to think of man and think of others, and do what men and women often do -- just think of Himself -- what would happen? What do you think would happen? If from tonight God ceased to think of anyone but Himself, what would happen? You say, "I would get on all right." Would you? Do you know what would happen if God ceased to think of others, and only thought of Himself? There would be no tomorrow, no dawn. God wanted Job to understand that. He says, "Do you command the morning?" "Do you make the dawn know its place?" Could Job bring the dawn? Could he command the sun to come up and shine upon the evil and the good? Why does God do it? Because He does not only think of Himself He thinks of everything on the earth. It says of the sun: "Nothing is hid from the heat thereof."
{51}
What would you do, dear friends, if God did not send the rain? Supposing there was no more rain, what about man's boasted science and that sort of thing -- all man's inventions? Supposing there was no more rain from today, all flesh would perish and return to dust. That is what would happen. Nothing that man could do could prevent it. It would but be a question of a very short time, for there is on the earth as an average only 18 months¬ supply of food at any one time. If food ceased to be produced, in 18 months everybody on the face of the earth would be dead. But God does not only think of Himself. An eminent scientific man claimed recently to having discovered that the universe came into existence by the accidental explosion of chaotic gases; it did not come from the hand of God; it was an accident. This was cabled round the world! Marvellous accident, was it not? Do you think man ever gets accidents like that? Can any really believe creation is an accident? Can an accident go so far as to consider, for a camel that has to live in a desert -- to provide it with provision within its body to carry a large quantity of water -- to provide large tear-bags to remove the sand of the desert from his eyes -- and large eye-lashes to keep the sand out? Indeed, we do not need to go as far as that. Look at yourself; think of your eye. Do you think that is an accident? Indeed, dear friend,
{52}
look everywhere, and ask yourself can an intelligent person deny that God is? Indeed, the Spirit of God says, "The fool" (it matters not what reputation such may have for intelligence) "hath said in his heart -- there is no God"; such professing themselves to be wise become fools. That is just where we have reached today. Look again, and you can see that God does not only think of Himself. He thinks of us. He thinks of all His creatures. Think of the precision, the forethought that is evidenced in all the work of God from the tiniest ant to the largest elephant; it is beyond the mind of man to fathom. Everything has been thought out perfectly. So that it says if God only thought of Himself, all flesh would perish; it would return to dust if He withdrew His breath and His spirit, for, dear friends, these represent the power of life. I read not long ago a definite statement in a journal that shortly men will be manufacturing life. Don't you believe it. Life is through the breath of God and the Spirit of God; and the issues of life are in the hands of God. This was indicated when God put cherubim with a flaming sword turning every way round the tree of life; it means God will not allow man to get control of life. Men may think they have just got it within their grasp, but the sword of the cherubim will interfere. Men will not get it. God will retain that in His own hand. People say they only
{53}
believe what they can see. I do not believe it; it is not true, although they say it. Because they do not see God, they say there is no God; but, dear friends, it is not true that the invisible does not exist. I wonder who has ever seen life. We have in this room some of the producers of wheat -- perhaps tens of thousands or millions of grains. Open up a grain and find life. Where is it? You can analyse it; you can reduce it to its elements; where is the life? No one has ever been able to see it. Are you going to say there is no life there because you cannot see it? Put the grain into the ground, and you will soon find out whether there is life or not. Who has ever seen electricity? No one. The most eminent electrical engineers admit they do not know what it is; but who would deny that it is? The evidences of it are everywhere. It is there in that light; there is the proof of it. That you and I live is the proof that God is. The whole universe is the proof that God is. There is no possible explanation, dear friends, of the universe but God, Who is and ever will be the invisible God. None who have any intelligence, true intelligence, but must recognise that God is. What I had in mind is to show that God does not only think of Himself. He thinks of you. You may not know His thoughts, but He knows yours. Indeed, He can divide between a thought and an intent; I do not suppose anyone else but God
{54}
can do that. It says His word divides between the thought and intent. Everything is open before the eyes of Him with Whom we have to do. While you may know little or nothing about God's thoughts -- and none of us know much -- God knows everything in your mind and thoughts. As David says, "Thou art acquainted with my thoughts afar off," and the thoughts of millions of others. God knows your thoughts, dear friend, whoever you are, and He wants you to know His. If you ever learn to know them in the present period, you will say how precious they are! how great! how elevated are the thoughts of God! There is only one way that thoughts can be expressed as far as I know -- that is, by "word." You all have some thoughts at the present moment, but unless you speak I would not know -- I could not know them. We could never know what God thinks except as he is pleased to express them in word. It is in His word that we learn His thoughts; that is what took me to these other three scriptures. In each of them the Lord Jesus Christ is personally called the Word. In Luke, those of you who read the New Translation will see certain were eye-witnesses of the Word -- referring to Jesus. In John it is still more clear in all renderings. "The Word was God, and the Word became flesh and dwelt amongst us." In the Revelation you have the same thing. His name is called the
{55}
Word of God. That is to say, in these three connections God is telling us what He thinks, not in writing merely, and not exactly in speaking, but in a living Person; in a Man. You can understand, dear friends, that that becomes intelligible to men. When a Man is the expression of God's mind, of His thoughts, then what is expressed comes within our range, though we may not understand what is expressed fully. I only wanted to touch a little on these three scriptures -- Luke, John, and Revelation -- as bringing before us God's mind, expressed in His Word, Christ personally.
The great thought in Luke's Gospel -- and particularly in one's mind tonight -- is that what is expressed in Jesus in the most perfect and wonderful way is that God's thought for everybody on earth is to forgive them. That is what comes out in Luke's Gospel. This is the mind of God -- the thoughts that are in His mind expressed in Jesus are that God has no other thought towards any man or woman on this earth than to *forgive* them. That is His thought. I would that you would let that into your heart. I wonder if there is someone here troubled about their sins. God grant there might be, for you need to be troubled. David was troubled. He says, "For mine iniquities are gone over my head: as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me" (@Psalm 38: 4). They were like a great load that he carried
{56}
on him. He says they are too heavy. What about your sins? What are you going to do about them? You say -- Leave them in the past. There is nothing *past* to God. You may think you will leave the ones you think are major ones a year or ten years or fifty years behind. That does not make any difference to God. He does not live in time, and in any case it says, "He requires that which is past." That is no solution. The only way to get rid of your sins -- the burden of your sins is to have forgiveness. That is the only solution -- to have them forgiven. Scripture speaks of those who die in their sins -- those that take them into the presence of God. They still have them. What I want you to see is that God has forgiveness for you. As it says "But there is forgiveness with Thee that Thou mayest be feared" (@Psalm 130: 4. N.T.). That "fear" is the fear of reverence. David describes the blessedness of the man whose transgressions are forgiven. He describes it. Can you describe it? If you could hear what is in the hearts of dozens and dozens -- perhaps hundreds -- in this room, and what they could say about forgiveness! I speak to the dear children -- when you have done wrong in the sight of your parents, and the matter is put right by confession, and your parents have forgiven you, what a sense of happiness! Indeed, in some respects the position is better than before the sin.
{57}
If the forgiveness is whole-hearted on the part of the parent, and the confession whole-hearted on the part of the child, the position is better than it was before. I know it is from experience. The position of a sinner that has been forgiven is better than Adam's position in innocence -- a happier position. David describes the happiness of a man whose transgressions have been forgiven and whose sins are covered. That was the Word as expressed in Jesus. One dear woman who had a great burden of sin understood the Word. She saw the thought of God's heart expressed in Jesus. She had followed Him in His movements. It says she came behind Him weeping. The tears denote that she felt her sins. They were real to her; but she had discovered the heart of God, the mind of God in Jesus, and she came behind Him weeping, and kissed His feet and anointed them with the ointment. There was another person in the room named Simon. He neither knew what was in the mind of God nor did he understand the expression of God's mind in Jesus, nor did he know his own heart. He was thinking. He said in his thought, "This man, if he had been a prophet, would have known what manner of woman this is, for she is a sinner." It says Jesus *perceived* his thought. He sees your thought. If you think, "I am not really a sinner; I am not like the poor wretched ones with a big
{58}
load of sin," the Lord is looking into your thought. It says, "He perceived his thought." Then He says, "Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee. A certain man had two debtors; one owed 500 pence and the other owed 50 pence. Both were bankrupt; neither could pay one penny; but the creditor frankly (frankly means with a free absolute gift from his heart) forgave them both. Tell Me who will love him most?" The Lord was telling Simon what the woman had already understood -- that God's thought for Simon and God's thought for the poor woman of the city who was a sinner was forgiveness for both. It does not say Simon got the blessedness of it. The Lord turned to the woman and said to her, "Thy sins are forgiven, by faith hath saved thee ... . Go in peace." That is the mind of God -- God's mind to you at the present moment. I beg each heart to come into touch with Jesus, with a sense of your own sins -- how many they are! I defy anybody in this room to stand up and give a list of their sins the last few years. Not a person in this room wants his or her life laid bare. You who say, "Thank God I am not like other men" -- let every act and every thought come into the light here in this room so that every man may know it. You know very well you would not like it for one moment, and if you thought it was going to happen, you would leave at once. God knows it, and it is
{59}
much more serious for God to know it than for me to know it. People are anxious to keep a good exterior towards their fellows; they have no thought of God. God wants to forgive you. That is His mind. Luke's gospel confirms it all through. Think of Calvary; think of all who were there. Pilate was there. What a sinner Pilate was! -- wicked, heartless, self-seeking Pilate, who could say three times, "I find in Him no fault whatever." Then He scourges Him and delivers Him to be crucified. Pilate is there. Herod is not far away -- a man who only was interested in Christ by curiosity; he thought he would see something wonderful done -- that is all the interest he had in Christ. The soldiers are there, in their wickedness mocking the Lord, spitting upon Him, plucking the hair off His face. The criminals are there, casting insults into the teeth of Christ with the little strength that was left in the closing moments of their life. The priests, the religious leaders, that should have protected One who was wrongfully assailed -- they were energising the people to ask for a murderer rather than the Life-giver, for a robber rather than the blessed One who gave His all. The Lord looks upon all in the gospel of Luke, and He expressed what is going on in the mind of God. It is in these words: "Father, forgive them." The Lord did not say, "Leave Pilate out." He did not say, "Leave Herod out."
{60}
He did not say, "Leave Peter out," who, with oaths and curses, had denied he ever knew the Lord. He did not say, "Leave the priests out," or "Leave the robbers out." He said, "Forgive *them*." Dear friends, can you measure how high that thought is? Put that alongside man's thoughts and try to measure it. It is as high morally as the heavens are above the earth -- the thought that would think nothing but absolute forgiveness towards everyone. That is the Word of God. That Word is Jesus.
In the gospel of John, the great expression of what is in God's mind is not forgiveness, but it is life. As God looks upon this death-stricken world, the thought that is in His mind, translated in His Word, is that man should live -- not die. I do not mean "exist" -- that is not living. Everybody in this room is existing; they have not actually died. You never know when you may die. David says (@1 Samuel 20: 3): "There is but a step between me and death." That may be true of anyone in this room; there may be only one step between you and death. That is not what I mean, and it is not what John's gospel means. John's gospel is that we might *live*. It says, "That believing ye might have life in His name." Through the greatness of this wonderful Person, as believing in Him, we have life according to God. That is what is in God's mind. A person who has no joy is not really living. I
{61}
say it again -- a person who has no joy is not living according to God; he is existing. He is not dead, not in the grave, I admit; but he is not in life. Life, according to God, is to be happy. Are you happy, dear friend? Are you really happy? God wants you to be happy. That is what is in His mind; according to His Word, the Person of Jesus. The very first sign He did was to make people happy. He gave them wine. They had had other wine, but when they tasted what He gave them, the master of the feast enquired what had happened. God's mind for you is that you should be happy. The Lord provides true eternal happiness, and pleasures for ever more. That is one of God's precious thoughts. How precious are Thy thoughts! Then there was a man who was lying on his bed for 38 years -- he was not living, not really living; to be lying helpless on a bed for 38 years is not living. God wants man to be superior to all around, to walk and move here according to God. The Lord comes in as the Word and tells this man God's mind. He says, "Take up thy bed and walk." That was God's thought -- that the man should go about in power, not be helpless. People who are hungry are not living; people who have no food are not living. That is not life -- not the life that God has in mind. God wants men to be fed, to have plenty of good food. I would just like to ask each one -- what
{62}
do you eat? What do you feed your heart and mind on? What you feed on will disclose whether you are alive. The man who eats asses¬ heads is not living. At the siege of Samaria there were three kinds of food -- asses¬ heads, doves¬ dung, and each other's children. That represents what people are eating in this world. It is not really food at all. One represents folly. What a lot of it is devoured. Absolutely nothing but unadulterated rubbish is being devoured in this besieged world! The other is filth. Many books of today are brim -- full of filth; the theatres and pictures are handing out either folly or filth. People are eating it and dying. The Lord is the living bread, the true bread, the bread from heaven. The mind of God is that we should eat it and be satisfied. Everyone was filled when He gave them the bread, and there were 12 full baskets taken up afterwards. That is what I call living. The Lord came in in John that we might live. One cannot pursue it any further. The Word of God in Luke's gospel, which is the expression of God's thoughts to us is that we should be forgiven. That is God's mind. Get it into your heart; repentance and remission of sins, as Luke says, is preached in His name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. As God's Word in John, He wants you to live; He does not want you to die. It culminates in the resurrection of Lazarus. The
{63}
final expression of God's thought is that the whole power of death is to be set aside; expressed in the One whose name is the Word.
In the Revelation you have another scene, another view of God's Word. It says of the One who sat on the white horse, out of whose mouth went a sharp two-edged sword, and was followed by the armies of heaven, all in absolute purity, that His name was the Word of God. He expresses God's mind at that moment. God's mind in Luke is forgiveness; in John His mind is that we should live; and in that part of Revelation when the time comes (it is very near), God's mind is unqualified and unsparing judgment. His thought will stand then just as truly as the other stands. What is presented there also is the Beast, the coming world leader. All, whether rich or poor, free or bond, that come under the control of that power will know what the mind of God towards them is, expressed in the Word of God; it is absolute and unqualified judgment. The beast was taken, and the false prophet, and cast into the lake of fire, excluded for ever from God's universe of blessing; and all that came under their power and authority are cut off. That is the mind of God. We are nearer to it than many think. The world is about to receive both the beast and the false prophet. The giving up of God is spreading like a plague; the apostasy from Christ is awful beyond words, and
{64}
another is taking His place, and he is going to have a following, alas! alas! but God's mind fully expressed then in the One whose name is the Word of God is unsparing and absolute judgment. You will never be in that scene if you will only listen to His Word now. Let His thought expressed in His Word in Luke come into your heart. God has forgiveness for you. Listen to His Word in John; God wants you to live, and He has brought in a Life-giver for you -- Jesus, the last Adam, the life-giving Spirit. But -- let God be true and every man a liar -- if you reject Christ, and find yourself under the power of the beast. God's mind in respect of such is the sword of Him who sits on the white horse -- is to bring unsparing judgment on those who reject God and Christ, and accept the leader who is about to appear. The Lord help us to listen to His thoughts, for they are precious. "How precious are Thy thoughts unto us, O God; how great is the sum of them!"
{65}
CHRIST - THE SHEPHERD
@Genesis 49: 22-24; @Hosea 12: 12
I would like, dear brethren, to bring before our hearts the two great objects of the service of the Lord Jesus Christ in the character of Shepherd. One is referred to in the first scripture we read, in which it speaks of Christ typically -- "from thence is the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel." What I believe that suggests is, that the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ as shepherd leads us to know Him as the stone of Israel. The other scripture tells us that "Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep," which means that the object of the shepherd activities of Christ is to secure a wife. I believe that these two great thoughts culminate in eternity. The result of the Lord Jesus coming out as a shepherd will be that for eternity there is a dwelling place for God, and another result will be that for eternity He will have "a bride adorned for her husband." He will have what a wife suggests, for His own heart, and I wanted, with the Lord's help, just to bring before you for a few moments some of the shepherd services of Christ, so that, as knowing them a little more, we might be prepared to have part in God's building more definitely, and to take our place as belonging
{66}
to that blessed company which ministers to the heart of Christ.
I take it that the object behind the precious activities of Christ as shepherd has those two great and blessed ends in view. I do not think that any of us will doubt that the shepherd service of the Lord Jesus Christ is one of the most attractive ways in which we know Him. Wonderful, dear brethren, to remember, wonderful to enjoy, what the passage means which is so well known, even to the children, "The Lord is my Shepherd." What a wondrous thing for the heart to take hold of!
"Feed the flock of God which is among you." There is but one flock composed of innumerable sheep; yet, dear brethren, do not let us lose the blessed sense that "The Lord is *my* shepherd." The Lord Jesus would convey to each heart the sense of His personal interest and affection for each sheep. I think everything springs out of that, the maintenance of the personal regard and love of Christ for each one.
The apostle John, he who speaks so much of the shepherd service of Christ, when he speaks of himself says, "that disciple whom Jesus loved." He had learned in his sojourn with the Shepherd, the Good Shepherd, to enjoy the love of Christ in his own soul. So that when he speaks of himself he says, "that disciple whom Jesus loved." Of course He loved the whole
{67}
flock; but John knew that He loved him, and it is John who says "Now Jesus loved Martha." One delights in the attractiveness of that passage; it does not say "Now Jesus loved them," but "Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus," so that each of the three has the sense personally of the love of Christ for them. What a joy and stay to the heart! If only, dear brethren, we should each one be preserved with the living sense in our hearts that the Shepherd calls His own sheep by name; how real it would make the love of Christ to us!
That was the manner of Saul's introduction to the flock. From heaven he heard, "Saul, Saul!" He learned that the Lord Jesus in heaven had a personal interest and regard for him, so that later on he says, "the Son of God who loved *me* and gave Himself for *me*." How that was conveyed to Saul's soul afterwards as he was in the house of Judas in the street called Straight! One of the subsidiary shepherds, one of the shepherds that worked under the Great Shepherd, with the true shepherd's heart -- Ananias -- said, "Lord I have heard by many of this man; how much evil he hath done to Thy name." He had regard for the sheep, he feared the sheep might suffer, and he speaks to the Chief Shepherd about it; but the Chief Shepherd says, "Go thy way, for he is a chosen vessel unto me to bear my name before the gentiles and
{68}
kings and the children of Israel." Saul had the sense conveyed to him of the deep interest of Christ personally from heaven, and then from one of the under shepherds.
I feel for myself, and I am sure we all share it, the intense necessity of being maintained personally by the touch of Christ, and having the sense of the joy in our own hearts of the personal love of Christ for each sheep.
And then we find the Lord's shepherd care for the household of His own -- the two going to Emmaus -- coming into their house, drawing near them, loving to hear what they say of Him. It is most impressive to see the delight the Lord has in hearing the sheep speak of Him. The Shepherd loves to hear the thoughts of the sheep as to Himself. He draws near to these two and says, "What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another as ye walk and are sad?" And they say, "Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things that are come to pass there in these days?" And the Lord said, "What things?" And they said unto Him, "Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people." It was just what they thought of Him that He wanted to draw out from their hearts. They might have said something more than that. The Lord loves to draw out of the hearts of His own their impressions
{69}
of Him. I would just point that out for the encouragement of the feeblest, that the Lord loves to draw out of our hearts our impressions of Himself, as He evidenced when He said, "What things?"
Again, when He drew near to Mary Magdalene, and said to her, "Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou?" He knew why she was sad, but He wanted to hear what she would say when He said, "Whom seekest thou?" "If thou hast borne him hence, tell me where thou hast taken him and I will take him away." That was sweet incense to the heart of Christ. If she had not Him she had nothing. He drew it out deliberately.
So one just loves to touch a little more upon the shepherd services of Christ. The Shepherd of the flock, not only of each single sheep. There is but one flock and one Shepherd; and while the under shepherds have failed ignominiously, yet the blessed Great Shepherd, the Chief Shepherd, carries on His service, and there is food and there is quietness. The effect of His service is that it teaches us to love Him; it draws out our affections for the Shepherd, so that we learn to know Him as the Good Shepherd. "I am the Good Shepherd that giveth his life for the sheep." We learn to know Him as the director of every other shepherd that lives here. The service of the Chief Shepherd is to give direction
{70}
to every other shepherd. I believe that this in a living way prepares us for the two lines I have indicated.
Jacob, referring to Joseph as a type of Christ, says, "the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel." In human things there is no link whatever between these two -- i.e., a shepherd and a stone; but I believe that Christ in His service as shepherd prepares our hearts for the thought of Him as the stone. I want to touch a little on that "The Stone of Israel." It does not speak of the characteristics of the Stone, but simply lays it down that the Shepherd is the Stone. It introduces our minds and hearts to a building; but first of all one has been impressed by this, that the first knowledge we ever have of Christ as the Stone is as a stone of stumbling. God says, "Behold I lay in Zion -- a stone of stumbling." What for? To clear the ground for God's building. To clear the ground of all the rubbish. The one who clears it is the Shepherd. The One who clears our minds and hearts of the rubbish is the Shepherd. "A stone of stumbling and a rock of offence." It is laid in mercy. Do you know one of the greatest mercies we ever get from God is that He brings down our pride; that He humbles us? We may not think so at the time, but it is an immense mercy that God has come in to bring down the pride of man. He does it in mercy. Why? That we may have part in
{71}
the building which God is erecting for eternity. We will never take into that building anything of the pride and glory of man. The Lord Jesus comes in as the Stone of Stumbling, as Simeon understood it when he took the little child in his arms and said, "This child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel." God will bring down the pride of man, and the way He does it is by bringing in Jesus. No heart ever followed in the footsteps of Christ intelligently without being humble. At His entrance into this world where do you find Him? In Bethlehem. "The Lion of the tribe of Judah" was there in the manger. Is that the One you are to believe on? The One in the manger? Where do you find Him? At Nazareth! We know that no good thing could ever come out of Nazareth, according to the mind of man, so He is known as "Jesus of Nazareth." Of His public life in this world what do you see? He has no home -- no place of abode. Followed by whom? Mary Magdalene, out of whom He cast seven devils. A woman of the city who was a sinner and whom He had forgiven. The blind beggar whose sight He had restored and who followed Him in the way. Certain women ministered to Him out of their substance. He went out of this world with the reproach and ignominy of Calvary, with a thief on either side. What is God doing? Laying a stumbling stone to bring down in our hearts
{72}
and minds the sense of pride and glory of man. What for? So that we may have a living part eternally in God's building where everything, is for His glory. The One who does this we have known as Shepherd. We have learned to love Him. Hence we are prepared by Him as a stone to bring down man's pride and vain-glory. We see Him as a Stone. We see Him on the ground that has been cleared of the pride and glory of man. We see a foundation laid in Him. He is not only a stone of stumbling, but a foundation -- "Behold I lay in Zion a chief corner stone elect, precious." We have learned Him a little as the Shepherd, we have learned to trust Him -- we have seen His self-sacrificing love, and it brings our hearts to be in accord with this, that everything for God must rest on Him. This world does not rest upon the foundation God has made in the Lord Jesus. The apostle Paul came to that. He stumbled at the Stone. He had to come down from his own heights, great man as he was, and found there was no foundation for God unless resting on the Lord Jesus.
Not only does He clear the rubbish as the stone of stumbling -- *that* starts the whole foundation -- but He is the chief corner stone. What are we connected with? Does it, whatever it is, give pre-eminence to Christ? If not, it belongs to another building that will come down. But the building of God gives pre-eminence to the
{73}
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the chief comer stone. We are told He is the head stone. The completion of the whole structure is Christ. He can be trusted as a foundation: He is great enough to be the adornment. He is worthy to be its foundation -- "The Shepherd, the Stone of Israel."
In Hosea we have another suggestion, and that is that "Jacob served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep." The building will be a dwelling-place for God, and will be eternally the result of the self-sacrificing service of Christ. There will be nothing that is not descriptive of Christ. John's gospel tells us that He appropriated God's temple to Himself. "Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up." He spoke of His body. God could only dwell in that which was expressive of Christ. The Church, which is His body, is the temple in which Christ is expressed now, and that will be eternally the dwelling of God. What God will get out of the service of Christ is an eternal dwelling-place in which His glory is secure -- where Christ is enthroned. Christ is its foundation, adornment and completion.
Something for the heart of Christ is seen in the other scripture: "He kept sheep." You and I are preserved by His shepherd care. He does not let His sheep go. He tends them: He tends the weak and sick: He tends the oppressed. "We
{74}
were," says Peter, "as sheep going astray." He had learned by experience the precious service of the Shepherd. He was going astray; he had turned away from Christ; he had gone out; but the Shepherd went out after him. "Ye were as sheep going astray, but are returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls."
What I wanted to touch on was this -- that the object of the service of Christ to each one of us is to draw us near to Himself, and how much we ought to thank Him for it.
He keeps sheep for a wife, so that He will secure a vessel that has the characteristics of a wife. What are they? Subjection to her own husband! Three times in the New Testament it is confirmed that the one great feature of a wife is that she is subject to her husband. The effect of the shepherd service of Christ will be that the church will be subject to Him for ever, and will hearken to His voice eternally with the gladness of hearts that love Him. What then? "And the wife see that she reverence her husband." "The husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church." Christ is infinitely greater than the church. Christ is the object of the reverence of the church eternally. As the psalm says, "So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty; he is thy lord and worship thou him." As Sara called Abraham lord, so our hearts will eternally pour upon Him the
{75}
reverence that a wife gives to her husband -- the source and spring of it all the service of Christ. God intends every local company of saints to have the character of His building. As our hearts know Him as Shepherd, we are prepared for a structure where He is supreme. We are prepared by the removal of the glory of man for a structure that rests upon Him, and where He is the adornment. As our hearts delight in Him as Shepherd, we are prepared to minister to His heart as happily subject to Him who loved the Church and gave Himself for it.
May the Lord help us to so learn the preciousness of His shepherd service, that here in this city there may be something in the nature of Cod's building, something that bears the features of a wife for the heart of Christ for His name's sake.
{76}
OUR OUTLOOK
@Colossians 3: 1-4
There are two things, dear brethren, that have been impressed upon me of late -- one is the first word that is said in connection with the coming of the Holy Ghost, that is, that there was a sound from heaven. The first feature of the presence of the Spirit of God in Christianity is said to be a sound from heaven; and the other thing that has been on my mind is that Noah was told to make a window *above* in the Ark, which I think indicates that God's thought for His people as passing through and being delivered from the sin and corruption and darkness through which we pass; is that our outlook should be above. The first would indicate that one great object of the Spirit of God's presence in the Church is to bring to us the report, the sound, of that which is in heaven, the sound from heaven. There are other great and wonderful features referred to afterwards. It says, "Suddenly there came a sound from heaven." I believe the thought of God is that His people here today should have communications, knowledge, and enjoyment of that which is in heaven, and that God would have the outlook of His people *above*. The window was to be *above*. One feels, dear brethren,
{77}
that the great object of the enemy is to divert the saints from the thoughts of God. He uses many, many things. I suppose if one speaks from one's own experience, the first great question which arises in the history of the believer as desiring to lay hold of God's thoughts stands connected with our bodies. The condition of a man's body is described in the Epistle to the Romans. What a description it is! Various members are referred to -- the throat, the lips, the mouth, the feet, the heart, the mind. The body was in such a condition that it is said of some that God gave them up. But when God comes in in His grace through the Gospel, and picks us up for Himself, there arises the conflict in the soul as to whether the body is to be continued as a servant of sin or whether it is to be held for God. I do not think anyone is free to pass any further, or move any further, in laying hold of what God has in His mind until that matter is faced. Is my body held as a servant of sin, or are the members instruments of righteousness? The end of Romans is that the body is presented as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. The power for it is that first of all the heart has been brought into attachment with Christ. The man in @Romans 7 says, "Who shall deliver ... death?" He goes on, "I thank God ... " He has learned that attachment to Christ can deliver him from
{78}
the body of this death. He gets light as to the immense value of the Holy Spirit as the power to be here, and the righteous requirements of the law are met, and the consequence is that the body is held for God.
One sees great numbers of young people at the meetings, and I am sure, dear brethren, that the great exercises of the epistle to the Romans lie as a doorway into further blessing, if we only face them. The Lord would challenge those of us who are young, particularly as to whether we have faced that great question as to what we are doing with our bodies.
Well, then, it may be that in some measure we have learned a little of that, and then we come to another great test, and that is *the world*. That is what the apostle brings forward in Corinthians. It is not the world on the lines of its lust and overt wickedness, but the world as the system of human pride and glory, and the enemy would introduce the glamour and greatness of the world to keep back the people of God from laying hold of what God has in His mind. What the apostle brings forward to meet that is the Cross. He says, "By which the world is crucified to me ... " It is a remarkable statement -- the world is crucified to me! He says the world in its shame and exposure and dishonour through the Cross of Christ is crucified to me (@Galatians 6: 14). He lives in the light of the crucifixion of Christ; he
{79}
sees the world of wisdom and glory in its true character. I think it is remarkable in the four gospels that they all speak of the place where the Lord Jesus was crucified as the place of a skull, which means it is the end of man's wisdom. If you look at a skull, you will observe that it is the end of the intelligence, the glory, the wisdom of man. That is what the Cross is. The fact that the wisdom of this world should crucify the Lord of glory is the exposure of the worthlessness of man's glory and pride and wisdom. The apostle says it is crucified to *me*, so that the heart is liberated from the sphere of man's glory and man's pride.
Then, dear brethren, there is something else the enemy would use, and perhaps in our day it is the greatest trouble -- the earth! That is in Colossians. "Set your affections ... above." Set your *minds* on things above, not on things of the earth. The earth would occupy the hearts of the saints as the absorbing object behind which Satan is working in order that we shall be diverted from the thoughts of God. One speaks, I trust, with some sense of the reality of this test. It is everywhere with us today as to whether the things of this earth are the things for which we are living and upon which our minds are set, or whether they are set on things above. It was the desire to say something as to what is *above* that was before me tonight. Seek the things
{80}
which are above where Christ sits on the right hand of God. It challenges one's heart as to what we know of what is above, of the things above. What are they? What do we know of them? It is as our affections and our minds are engaged with those things beyond, that we shall be preserved from living in the things of the earth. First of all I would like to say a word as to the God who is above, in heaven. It says God is in heaven. "But to us there is one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in Him" (@1 Corinthians 8: 6). What an object there is for our hearts and minds in seeking God, the Father, who is in heaven! I do not mean in the physical sense; but He is above in *every* sense. He is above man's world, above man's wickedness, above man's weakness. He is above. Unto us there is one God, the Father. The Spirit of God is calling attention to features of the Father for the enjoyment and appropriation of our hearts. He is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. As the Father, He is the *source*. He is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Paul says, "For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" (@Ephesians 3: 14). That means, as I understand it, that everything that came out in the Lord Jesus Christ had its source in the Father. What an object! How earthly things look small as we think of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the source of everything.
{81}
Then it says, He is the Father of glory; everything that is glorious, that is really great, dear brethren, has the Father as its source. Do we want to have regard to what is really great and glorious? The Father of glory is set before us. We are told, "In heaven they do always behold the face of My Father." He is above. He is there as an object for minds and hearts -- the Father of glory. Another blessed feature to engage us is the Father of compassions. The blessed source of compassion is above. He is there to engage us as an object for our hearts and minds. But then the Lord Jesus Himself is there. He is above. He has gone into heaven. Christianity began with men gazing up into heaven. I do not think that passage, "Why stand ye gazing into heaven?" is a rebuke. I think it is a right attitude for Christians. This same Jesus who has gone into heaven, I think indicates that He is there personally. Jesus is His personal name, not His official title, but His personal name by which He is known to every heart. We are told Jesus loved Martha. Martha had the personal sense of the love of Jesus. Jesus is personally in heaven. If we only realised it more, the claims of the earth would become insignificant. The earth as an object would fail if we realised more that Jesus personally is in heaven. This same Jesus has gone into heaven. He is there, too, as *Saviour*. "We look for a
{82}
Saviour." The Saviour is there. He has saved us and will save us even to the extent of the changing our bodies of humiliation, and fashioning them like His glorious body.
Then I wanted to say a little more as to other features of the Lord as in heaven. He is there *as Head*. As we read in the epistle to the Colossians, "where *Christ is*." As Christ He is the Head for the whole universe, for every man. Think of it -- every man! If they will seek Him, He is available to every man. He is a Head great enough to sustain and control and influence the whole Church. But He is above; so that Christ is the One in whom all that is pleasing to God resides. As Christ, He is Head. He is not here; He is in heaven -- "Where Christ is." Then He is there as *Priest*. He has gone into heaven itself. He has not gone into the holy places made with hands, but into heaven itself. He is the great Priest of the people of God, whether to support us in our weakness or in relation to God, He is above. So that, dear brethren, if the Lord help us, and He would help us, we should seek what is above, not what is on the earth. We are told to seek the *things* which are above; not only the God and Father known in His various characteristics, and the Lord Jesus in His many offices as well as Himself personally, but we are told to seek the *things* which are above.
{83}
There is a vast range of things which are above which are to be sought, and as we seek them we will find we are saved from the dominion of the earth. If we live in relation to the earth, you will find we will soon come under Satanic influence -- earthly, sensual, devilish. What will save us from being earth-dwellers is seeking the things above. I wanted to draw attention to a few of them; the vast things that surround the Lord Jesus Christ, where Christ is. Scripture tells us to get a glimpse of what is above. James tells us of the *wisdom* that is from above. There is other wisdom that is marked by strife and envy and all kinds of evil. There is a vast amount of wisdom which is to be sought, and the Word tells us it is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without hypocrisy. That kind of wisdom is in store above in heaven. I know it is in Christ, but the Word says it is above and to be sought. We need it today. The spirit of strife and envy is abundant throughout this world, but what the saints need is the wisdom from above, which is to be sought. Wisdom is resource, and with *such* wisdom we can meet every situation. If we had a supply of that wisdom, all those other features would follow, and the worst situation that would arise would be met. So that we are to seek it.
{84}
Then there is a *citizenship* for us above. Have we a sense of the greatness of that? Citizen's rights in heaven! How it would save us from citizenship of this world! How the cities of this world would look small if we took account of the heavenly city! Scripture speaks of the heavenly Jerusalem -- Jerusalem above, and we have a citizenship there. Every saint of God has a citizenship in heaven which saves him effectively -- as it is sought, it saves him from the citizenship of earth. What a city! It has the glory of God. It is an amazing expression to be connected with that which is created. The holy city, heavenly Jerusalem, descending out of heaven, having the glory of God! No human lips, no human pen could pen such a thing" -- having the glory of God." Other cities have the glory of founders or countries where they are. What are they? What is the glory of Melbourne compared with the glory of God? The outshining glory of what God is! What are its features? One of the greatest is there is nothing whatever of darkness there. Transparency is probably the greatest feature of the city. Its shining is most precious -- clear as crystal. Its light that emanates from it is as clear as crystal. Its walls are of jasper, and the city was pure gold, like unto clear glass. The whole city is pure. Its river was a pure river of water of life -- clear as crystal. Every influence from that
{85}
city is undefiled by the dark influences that belong to this world, which every city of this world is tainted with to a greater or lesser degree. But in that city the throne of God and of the Lamb are found. God and the Lamb -- that blessed One who suffered. His throne is established in that city. It says, "I saw no temple therein, for God and the Lamb are the temple thereof." God and the Lamb are immediately and directly there. They are not there in the shrine, not in any intermediate way, but there as the temple themselves. We have a citizenship in that city which is above. Our citizenship is in heaven. Let us seek as one of the things which are above to know the blessedness of citizenship in that city.
There are other things that one can suggest. Peter tells us that we have an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled which fades not away. An inheritance which is incorruptible, that cannot be taken away; not only that it is not corrupted, but it cannot be corrupted or defiled, and that can never disappear, or fade away. Dear brethren, what an inheritance! What are the inheritances of the earth compared with the inheritance that is reserved in heaven. In the mind of God there is an inheritance reserved in heaven, and it is to be sought. Seek the things which are above. Some of us were speaking just now of a man that had an inheritance left him
{86}
that would enable him to do everything on this earth, but life was worthless to him. But there is an inheritance that is ours, which is ours for the seeking. It is reserved in heaven. What is it? The greatest feature of it is that in the enjoyment of it we are conformed to the image, of His Son. That is, we are to correspond to Christ as the Son of God. We are to have in that inheritance a place of sonship before the Father. The liberty, the joy, the holy affections, the blessed service that belongs to sons! Our tiny minds and hearts know little of it. We see it in Christ, the deliverer of our souls. The One who as a Blessed Man could look up and say "Father" without a shade or shadow of distance, with all the liberty of holy relationship. That is what I believe is the climax of that inheritance reserved in heaven. It is to be known now. If we seek it we shall taste it. In the power of the Holy Ghost we shall enjoy our inheritance. There are many other things we cannot speak of. The temple of God is there; the ark of the covenant is seen in the temple. What a range of thoughts for our minds and hearts! Christ as the Ark of the Covenant! The blessed Vessel *was seen there*, is to be seen there! One other thing -- we know that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness. The execution of it is future -- but it is there, and as we seek what is above, we have the knowledge
{87}
of it though we will never be the objects of it. I can understand that as Noah and his family moved through the waters, the outlook was above. They would be sensible of the wrath of God, conscious of His judgment on unrighteousness; but their outlook was above.
One desires to suggest these thoughts that the Lord may use to help to save us from the things of the earth. They are the snares. One is conscious that the things on the earth are the snares, and they are used to divert our hearts and minds from the things above; but let us have a glimpse of the great realm of things which find their centre in God, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Ark of His covenant, and all the things which are above, and we shall then be preserved in our minds. One would call attention to the importance of the *minds*. Set your minds on things above. How much we are affected by that which occupies our minds. I know the heart has an immense place, but the mind has a great place also. Set your minds on things above. There is that which is above, which is worthy, dear brethren, that our minds should be occupied with and controlled by, and as that is so I am sure we shall find that the Lord preserves us from the dominion of that which is on earth.
