{#TWO WORLDS}
{4}
“Now is the judgment of this world, now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. This he said, signifying what death he should die.” (@John 12: 31 - 33)
“And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever. And the four and twenty elders, which sat before God on their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come; because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned. And the nations were angry, and thy
{5}
wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and them that fear thy name, small and great; and shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth. And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament: and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail.” (@Revelation 11: 15 - 19)
TWO WORLDS
These scriptures speak of two worlds. In the first the Lord says, “Now is the judgment of *this* world,” and the other passage in the Revelation speaks of the world of our Lord and of His Christ. I would like you to face before God the question as to which world you live in. The object of the gospel is that God would take us out, of this world, as the apostle says, “Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of
{6}
the Son of his love,” that is, into His world.
Whether we believe it or not, there is nothing between these two worlds; either we are in the one or we are in the other. Men would like to be neutral; they would like to take a middle course or position, but we are either in *this* world in our hearts, in our minds, in our objects, or we are in God’s world.
It is quite clear, as we consider man and the way God has made him, that he must have part in a world; even the most depraved races of mankind have the instincts of a world. No one is
{7}
content to live as a cow or a sheep, to simply eat and drink and sleep and die. Man is so made that he must have part in a system of things, however feeble and corrupt. If you take the native races of Australia -- the most depraved of mankind -- they have built up a system. They do not live like animals; they have a king and some kind of rule and law; they have also a religion. So we are all in one system or the other. We are in this present evil world, taking part in it, living for it, coming under its judgment, or we are in God’s world with all its blessing.
{8}
Scripture tells us of the world that it is passing; it is a world that is disappearing. It does not say that it *has* passed, or that it *will* pass, but that it is passing; it is disappearing. We are living in the most solemn day that could possibly be; in a day when the final disappearance of the whole world system is about to take place. It is like a ship that is sinking at sea, settling down, down, down, until the moment when the final plunge is taken and it disappears for ever. But men do not know that the ship is sinking. God would open our eyes to the fact that it is sinking;
{9}
He says, “the world is passing, and its lust.” (@1 John 2: 17)
On the other hand there is a world that is coming. It is not that it *will* come, nor that it *has* come, but it is *coming*! It is nearly here, and will soon come into display. The passage we read in Revelation celebrates its arrival; it says, “The kingdom of the world of our Lord and of his Christ is come.” Now God wants you in that world; He wants to take you out of this one before it sinks, and put you into that blessed world that will stand for ever.
Now I want to point out a
{10}
few features of each world. Each has its God. This world has its god -- “the god of this world.” (@2 Corinthians 4: 4.) The thought of “god” is an object of worship. And whom does this world worship? The devil! Do not shut your eyes to it. The god of this world is Satan, hiding behind ten thousand things, but seeking the worship of men’s hearts. He deceives them that they should not be aware of it, but when he met the Lord Jesus on earth he knew he could not deceive Him, so that for once in his history he came out into the open. He shewed Him all the kingdoms of the world,
{11}
and the glory of them, and said, plainly, “If thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine.” That is his object in this world. Do you worship him? You do if you do not worship God. In God’s world there is a God, “the only true God”; “God,” it says, “judge of all.” (@Hebrews 12: 23) He is the object of the worship of all in that world.
Each world has its prince. The world does not like princes today; it is a day when people think everybody should come down to one level, but there is no such thing in either world. This world has its prince, its
{12}
great leader, its chief. Who is it? The devil: “the prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me.” (@John 14: 30) The prince of this world, the one who leads the whole of this system, is Satan.
God’s world has a prince. Who is it? Jesus! He is “The Prince of Peace,” and “The Prince of life” (@Isaiah 9: 6; @Acts 3: 15), and “the Prince of the kings of the earth.” (@Revelation 1: 5.) He is the Leader that God has appointed to lead every one in His world. Does He lead you? Every human being is led by someone, either by the prince of
{13}
this world -- Satan -- or by the Prince of God’s world -- Jesus. Which prince leads you? I would beg of every heart to face it. There are only these two princes. You must be led by one or the other.
In each world there is great glory. Satan has his exceeding high mountain to which he took the Lord. There is exaltation in this world, and great power is available in it. Nebuchadnezzar had it; how he misused it! The Roman Caesars have had it. Napoleon had it, to the sorrow of the earth. The Kaiser sought it. A man is about.to arise that
{14}
will have it, who will sit on the pinnacle of this world’s glory and usurp God’s place.
But God’s world has a mountain, the most magnificent mountain in the universe. Scripture says, “Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion.” (@Psalm 48: 2) What does mount Zion represent? It represents the most exalted principle in God’s world, the principle of mercy, the sovereign mercy that only exalts God. We come into that world entirely on the ground of mercy. Therefore all the glory belongs to God.
The publican was on one mountain
{15}
when he smote his breast and said, “God be merciful to me the sinner.” The Lord said of him that he went down justified, he went down approved by God to enter His world. The Pharisee stood on the other mountain; he said, “God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men.” He remains on that mountain till he is judged -- unless he judges himself.
Each world has a river. There is the river of Egypt; it is the very life of Egypt. What would Egypt do without its river, for it gets no rain? Egypt does not live by rain from heaven; its
{16}
life is in its river. The Spirit of God tells us what kind of river it was. It says that its water was blood. All that that river brings into your heart is death. Peter speaks of it in another way; he calls it the sink of corruption. It is filled with corruption, and Peter speaks of those who run to it to drink out of its filthy waters to satisfy their hearts. That is what men are doing today. You see it everywhere; in the vile books, in the contaminating pictures, in the corrupt excitements that minister to the hearts of men, they are running to this unclean river to find satisfaction.
{17}
Are you doing that? You have to drink out of some river; you must have drink. Drink is necessary to your life, but which river are you drinking from? Is it the river of Egypt, or is it the river of water of life, clear as crystal, that flows out of the throne of God? (@Revelation 22: 1) What a river that is! It is living water. It is nothing corrupt, or stagnant, or old, but a fresh, living stream of living water as clear as crystal, with not a trace of corruption in it.
Do you say, How can I get it? God grant that you may say that. A poor woman said that once.
{18}
She had drunk out of Egypt’s river; she had found that it never satisfied her heart. She longed for something to satisfy her. And Jesus drew near -- the Source of the river of living water. He says to her, “Give me to drink,” and then He tells her that if she asked of Him, He would give her living water; water, He says, that shall be in her a well of water that would satisfy, so that she would never thirst again for ever.
How can we get it? Ask of Jesus; turn to Him. He invites you; He says, “If any man thirst, let him come unto me and
{19}
drink.” His last message from heaven is, “Let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.” (@Revelation 22: 17) Have you ever drunk out of that river? Flee, dear friends, flee from Egypt’s river, flee to Jesus! Turn to God’s throne, for the river flows out of the throne. That is to say, Accept Jesus as Lord, not only as your Saviour, but as your Lord, that you might come under His rule. You will find that out of the throne there will flow this blessed river of living water into your heart.
Again I would say, Every one
{20}
is drinking of one or the other of these rivers. It is an impossibility to live without drinking. Face it, dear friend, before God. Are you drinking out of Egypt’s river, that vile, corrupt stream, or are you drinking out of the river of the water of life, clear as crystal, that flows out of God’s throne?
Then each world has its city. No world would be complete without a city. There must be a seat of government, of administration; there must be a city where the king can live, where his throne is set. Every one of us lives in one city or the
{21}
other. Every one of us is a citizen of this world’s city, or a citizen of the heavenly city. Where is your citizenship? I ask.
God tells us the character of this world’s city, that great city, it says, “which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.” (@Revelation 11: 8) Are you willing to live in that city, which is spiritually called Sodom, where there is not only carnal corruption, as the Sodom of old, but where there is spiritual corruption, which is worse. What is Christian Science, what is Spiritism, what is Popery -- what are all these
{22}
dark, evil teachings that are filling the world today? It is what is spiritually called Sodom.
But then this city is spiritually called Egypt. What marked Egypt? Independence of God! Its king said, “Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice?” And that is what this city is marked by.
Then last of all it says, “Where also our Lord was crucified.” This city is where that blessed Saviour, so rightly our Lord, so rightly Lord of all, so rightly Lord of heaven and earth, has been crucified; where He has been put to open shame, where
{23}
His name has been cast out and dishonoured, for that is what crucifixion means. Are you going to live in such a city?
God’s world has a city, the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem, the beloved city, the new Jerusalem. What marks that city is perfect order, and purity; “the city,” it says, “was pure gold, as it were transparent glass.” God’s throne is in that city; the throne of God and of the Lamb. The gospel is to bring you into that city. And again I would say, You are living in one or the other; either your citizenship is in this world
{24}
or it is in God’s world. There is no neutral position, much as men might like one.
This world is influenced and controlled by a vast number of servants -- Satan’s servants. He could spare seven of them to keep one woman’s heart from entering into God’s world. Then a legion of them was available to hold one man, a man who was naked and living in a tomb. Think of that! It says he abode in the tombs. Many are doing that today; they do not live in homes, but in tombs. Think of what is in a tomb, and think of a man living in it! Many are
{25}
today; many are finding their life in unspeakable corruption. You see them outside the theatres, lined up to go into the tomb. What has happened? The legion of demons has got hold of men’s hearts.
And so scripture speaks of principalities and powers, and of the universal lords of this darkness. These are the unseen controllers of this world. But God’s world has myriads of servants, “an innumerable company of angels,” so many that they could never be numbered, all sent forth to be the servants of those that shall be heirs of salvation. God is
{26}
ordering His world behind the scenes. He is not short of servants; mighty beings every one of them waiting at His call; angels that do His commandments, hearkening to the voice of His word. (@Psalm 103: 20) He is using them to preserve His people in this world.
You say, If I leave this world, I shall starve, I shall suffer, I shall never get through; I could not face the power of Satan. But God has His myriads of servants who can open doors when men shut them, who can shut doors when men open them. These are God’s servants in His
{27}
world. No one sees them, but they are mighty and active on behalf of every one that is in God’s world. Why not come into that world? Those servants are mightier than Satan’s.
In Satan’s world there is an administration; what he is giving men to feed upon is hatred, lust and pride. He is ministering these things to their hearts, and they are feeding on them. In Satan’s world they ask for bread, and he gives them a stone; they ask for an egg, and he gives them a scorpion; they ask for a fish, and he gives them a serpent. That is the kind of administration
{28}
in Satan’s world. He does not call it a stone, a scorpion, or a serpent; he calls it bread. But God tells us its true name; there is nothing but poison and death in it.
But in God’s world there is a most blessed administration. It says, “Ye are come to Jesus ... the mediator of the new covenant.” That is the administration that goes on in God’s world. It is the making known to the hearts of men the fulness of the love of God, the thoughts of His blessed heart. The wine that makes glad the heart of God and men is ministered freely in God’s world.
{29}
In Satan’s world there is no possibility of cleansing; he himself is irrecoverable. He is the old serpent, the devil, and Satan. The leader that he will bring in, the Spirit of God says, is like a leopard (@Revelation 13: 2), and the question is raised, “Can a leopard change his spots?” There is no possibility of cleansing in Satan’s world. Men try a little, they try reformation and endless things to control wickedness, but there is no means of cleansing. But in God’s world it says. We have come “to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of Abel.” (@Hebrews 12: 24)
{30}
The blood of sprinkling is the precious blood of Christ, the means that God has provided for the cleansing of our hearts. “To him,” it says, “who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood.” And again, “These are they ... that have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.” The blood of sprinkling is the provision that God has made in His world for the cleansing of the hearts and ways of men. Such a thing does not exist in Satan’s world.
One would press the thought that there are the two worlds;
{31}
one is going out for ever under the eternal judgment of God, as it says, “the world is passing, and its lusts,” but the other is coming in, soon to be displayed publicly; it is established for ever. It says, “The world also is stablished; it cannot be moved.” That is God’s world. Do not let Satan deceive your heart. His great object is to hold you in *his* world. But God is working mightily; He is working still to pick you up in sovereign goodness and take you out of Satan’s world, to bring you into the kingdom of the world of our Lord and of His Christ. Do not turn away.
{32}
Let the word sink into your heart. Do not rest until your feet are in God’s world, until your heart is in that world.
{33}
“WHAT SEEK YE”
@Isaiah 55: 6, 7; @Luke 19: 10; @John 4: 19 - 28
In @John 1: 38 the Lord Jesus asked the two disciples who were following Him, “What seek ye?” I would like to ask you earnestly the same question. What are you seeking, dear friend? -- for you surely have some objective before you. You are not like a cow or a sheep leading an aimless existence; if you would disclose your heart and mind you would admit that you are following something. What is it? -- the Lord asks. You are not satisfied, though you may get up in the morning and go about your business, eat and drink and sleep, yet you know there is something more in life than to live just as an animal. Everyone is really seeking something, and the question the Lord would raise with you, as He did with these two men in @John 1, is, “What seek ye?” What is
{34}
your objective? What are you seeking? Many a man is after money. Do you think that if you could get all you want, you would be really satisfied? Suppose you reach your objective on that line and become a millionaire, do you think you would be happy? Do you think your heart would be satisfied? It is not many years since a wealthy man in S -- committed suicide because he felt life was not worth living. Ask those who are rich in this world, if they are really satisfied? Some would admit they are disappointed. Then again, if you reach your objective, how long will you keep it? You might not keep it even as long as you live, for Scripture says, “riches certainly make themselves wings; they fly away,” @Proverbs 23: 5. If your wealth does not fly away, death is very near, and you cannot take your riches beyond death. Whether you are seventy years of age, or thirty, or but a child, yet you may die; death may be only a step away -- as David said, “There is but a step between me and death.” It may be as near as that, and you have spent your
{35}
life in getting money which you cannot take with you.
Another person may say, I am not very interested in money, my objective is fame. What would I not give for a name! How many a man is in that position, and many a woman too. To have a place in the world of science, or of music, or in the business world, or in sport, or even in the world of religion. Dear friend, supposing you get what you thus seek, what is it worth? I sometimes walk past a monument on which is inscribed, ‘Their name lives for ever,’ and I say to myself. How false! How many persons on earth today have thought of the Duke of Wellington? It is not so very long since he was one of the greatest generals of the British army, but who today has thought of him? How many hearts have been warmed as they thought of him? Does his name live for evermore, when even a hundred years or so after his death he is largely forgotten. I question whether many have really thought seriously of Marconi today, though his death is so
{36}
recent. But, dear friends, millions have thought of the name of Jesus today!
Millions have thought of His fame and have rejoiced in His greatness! It lives in millions of hearts, as if He had only died yesterday instead of nearly two thousand years ago. His name indeed lives for evermore -- but not Wellington’s, or Marconi’s, or Napoleon’s. You may get all the fame this world can give you, and it is but a bubble. What is the fame of the fastest airman worth? It may last a week or two and then people forget all about him; or he may be dashed to pieces, and his name passes into oblivion with all its so-called fame.
So the Lord says to each one, “What seek ye?” One of the Lord’s names is “Counsellor.” He would counsel men: “Seek ye the Lord while he may be found; call ye upon him while he is near.” There is nothing more important for men than to seek the Lord, and to seek Him while He may be found. Do you think He cannot be found? Even men can communicate with one another across the
{37}
globe; in a very short time they will be able to see one another across the globe, and do you think the Lord cannot put Himself in touch with men at any time? Scripture tells us He is “very readily found,” and that He is “not far from every one of us.” That you cannot see Him with your natural eyes, does not alter the truth. The greatest things in the material universe are invisible; God is the invisible God; but He is very near you, and the word is, “Seek ye the Lord while he may be found.”
The prophet Amos says, “Seek him that ... turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark with night.” Man’s works are exceedingly small when you consider God and His works. Think of the wonder of a morning! The night passes and the morning breaks; it is a marvellous act of power and glory to bring about morning, when the sun rises and brings the light and warmth and gladness of another day. The prophet says, “Seek him.”
I would commend this word to you, my
{38}
friend, seek the Lord *now* when He may be found. Today is the time of salvation. Perhaps you say, I have a few years before I need do so. Are you sure? There is a place beyond death where you cannot find Him, where He is not near. Beyond death there is a great gulf fixed, and one side of that none can find God. Now is the time to find Him while He is near. He is watching you to see whether you want Him, as Paul said, “if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us.” If you have a feeling that you want God, God observes that, but then you cannot find God and go on with your wicked ways, the two things are morally impossible. “Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts.” You must give up your wicked way, and the unrighteous thoughts, if you want to find God. The publican was far from God, but he condemned himself and forsook his wicked way and his unrighteous thoughts, and said, “God be merciful to me a sinner,” and we are told he “went down
{39}
to his house justified.” He had found God. I earnestly commend his course to you. If you want to find God, you cannot go on with your wickedness and unrighteousness, but if you are prepared on your side to forsake them, you will find God. “Let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him.” He will abundantly pardon a repenting and returning sinner.
You may well be a seeker, and the Lord says to such, “Seek and ye shall find.” You may seek money, but you may not find it; you may seek fame, but it may elude you; you may seek pleasure, but it is not found; or rest and you cannot obtain it. Rest is one of the most difficult things to find in this world, but it is of all importance that you should find it. If you have not soul rest -- rest of heart, you will sink deeper and deeper into evil until it completely controls you. But the Lord Jesus says, “Seek and ye shall find” -- I would urge you to be a seeker after God and after Christ; He is at hand to be found. If you seek for “glory and honour
{40}
and immortality,” you will find eternal life in the knowledge of God.
I want to say, a word now about the Lord Jesus as a Seeker. It is wonderful that He should be a Seeker. “The Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.” Think of the Lord linking Himself with mankind as the “Son of man.” He took this title in relation to men, that He might seek men. He who, far above all the heavens, who was with God, and who was God, came to earth and took this title, that He might seek men. Whom will He seek? The lost, no one else. Have you ever thought of being lost? What a terrible word *lost* is! Man has lost God, and has lost his way. “They have all gone out of the way.” I do not know anything more pitiful than to think of man without God: the God who created, him; the God who shines on him creatorially every day, who sends the rain from heaven and the fruitful seasons. What will man do as lost? Alas, he will make an idol; for man must have a god, he must have an object. There is no race on earth that
{41}
has not its god, but these vain idols only displace the only true God in man’s heart. The “Son of man is come to seek and to save that which is lost.” Think of all the diligence with which He sought the lost. From the place of the glory of God down to Calvary, is the journey of that Seeker, the great Seeker from heaven, seeking the lost, travelling the road the lost ones have travelled, going on until He finds them.
Where will He find them? Calvary is the terminus, of the journey, and there He finds the lost. The two thieves crucified by the side of Christ are just samples of mankind. Two lost men -- two witnesses to man’s lost condition. One is found by the Seeker, but the other despised Him. The terminus to which man’s ways bring him is the place of the curse, and Jesus went there Himself -- went to Calvary -- seeking the lost. “The Son of man must be lifted up” -- I do not know anything more wonderful than that “must” -- He must be lifted up. Why “must”? Because He must find the lost, and to do so He must go where they are, and that is under
{42}
curse -- in darkness and woe and death and judgment. Jesus travelled that road to the terminus, to seek and to save the lost. One robber at His side is saved; he discovers the blessed Seeker in Jesus. He is found and saved, but the other despises the Seeker and is lost, and lost for ever. He goes into the outer darkness away from God. Does it not appeal to your heart that Jesus should thus come to seek you? Your side is to seek God, but the other side is, that He seeks you in your ruin and distance. He is seeking you at this moment; He says, “Give me thine heart.” He has knocked at the door of your heart many a time, and I would appeal to you to open to Him, that you may be saved.
In @John 4 we read of God -- the Father -- seeking. Isaiah tells us that *we* are to seek; the responsibility of every man, woman, and child is to seek God. That stands. As a responsible creature God requires you to seek Him, but then the Lord Jesus became Man that He might seek *you*, and in @John 4 He tells a poor
{43}
sinful woman that the Father is seeking. God Himself, made known in grace as the Father, is seeking men to worship Him. Do not the myriads of the worlds above satisfy Him? The vast realm of glory above us -- the worlds -- “were framed by the word of God.” Is that not sufficient for God? The earth with its fulness, its fruitfulness of trees and flowers and herbs, does that not yield satisfaction to the heart of God? Still He seeks. Innumerable angels mighty in strength, doing His commandments; His ministers doing His pleasure, cannot they give Him satisfaction? The Lord tells us He is seeking worshippers. He wants living persons -- not only worship, but worshippers. “The Father seeketh such to worship him.” He wants men to whom He is everything, whose hearts are engaged with Him, so that they worship Him in spirit and in truth. He wants your inner being to be moved towards Him, so that you worship Him in spirit. And then there must be truth -- no mere form, but truth in the inward parts as you approach Him.
{44}
The Lord Jesus was talking to a poor sinful unsatisfied woman. She had turned away from God to many objects, but she was still unsatisfied, and the Lord says to her, “the hour cometh and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship him.” The Lord proposed to satisfy her heart for ever, so that from her heart the Father might have the worship He was seeking. The Lord Jesus says, “Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.” He proposed to satisfy her heart for ever.
Supposing you were called to die today -- and any of us might be -- would the thought of entering into the presence of God bow down your soul in worship? Would you be in fulness of joy? That is what the Lord proposed to this poor woman -- that He would so fill her heart as finding in Himself a satisfying Object for her affections, that she would become a
{45}
worshipper. If Christ is your object, you will be a worshipper of God. The woman goes away, she leaves her water-pot. She says in effect, I have no more need of this, I have found Christ, and He is great enough to fill my heart, and to fill yours. She says to the men of the city, “Come, see a Man that told me all things that ever I did; is not this the Christ?” When Christ becomes your Object, you become a worshipper, and the Father finds what He seeks.
The great object of the gospel is not only to bless you and to deliver you from the wrath to come, blessed as that is, but that God might have the love of your heart, so that as knowing Him, and loving Him, you worship Him as satisfied for ever in the knowledge of Himself. God is made known in Jesus; He is “the image of the invisible God” -- a most wonderful statement. God has put Himself near to you in one Blessed Person, who is the “express image of his person.” What God is, is expressed in the Person of Christ.
May the Lord help you to seek God for
{46}
yourself, and you will find that Christ has been all the way to Calvary to seek you, so that you might become one who ministers to the desire of the Father -- God known in grace -- “for the Father seeketh such to worship him.”
GOD IS SPEAKING
@Jeremiah 5: 30, 31; @Jeremiah 12: 5, 6
God has many ways of speaking to us. I suppose no one doubts that He can speak. When Moses told God that he could not speak, God said to him, “Who hath made man’s mouth?” Do you think the One who made man’s mouth cannot speak? He has given to His creature the ability to speak -- a wonderful thing! Many take all for granted and never stop to think; but it is a marvellous thing to be able to speak. It distinguishes man from all other creatures on earth. Whatever infidels may say, the fact is that there is no other creature on earth that can speak but man. If God can impart, as the Creator, the power of speech to His creature, then surely God Himself can speak; He does speak in many ways.
Sometimes He comes and entreats men. That is a wonderful thing, that the Omnipotent
{47}
God should come to His creature and entreat him. “My Spirit shall not always strive with man,” He says, but He does plead with them. Sometimes God warns men. Sometimes He comes to us with a command, speaking as the King eternal. Sometimes He reasons with us, and that is what is in my mind -- I want to reason with you for God. God Himself uses that word, “Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord.” That is marvellous language for God to use -- that He would come to His creature and say, We will reason the matter out. Paul did that, as God’s servant -- he reasoned with Agrippa. He did not entreat him, he did not warn him, nor command him, but he reasoned with him.
In the verses in @Jeremiah 5, God says in effect, When God removes all the lies that have been told, what will you do in the end? When everything that is false disappears, what will you do? I would like you to look this in the face. It says of
{48}
what is false, “My people love to have it so.” I wonder why it is that if you tell people a lie, many delight in it.
A Christian doctor, who was a lecturer in a university, said that if he were to say that man was the offspring of the ape, many would clap. Many would be delighted to hear him tell them that they were the descendants, of apes, but if he said that certain families were descended from Kaffirs, some generations back, he might be taken to court about it. It is magnificent to be told that man has descended from the apes, but to be told that you have some black man’s blood in you might be regarded as libel. The first is a lie, and men love it; the second might be true -- often is -- and is not wanted. Now, why is that, dear friends? Why is it that men love lies? Scripture speaks of those who love and make a lie, @Revelation 22: 15.
If the universe is simply an accident developed, then, of course there is no God and no question of good and evil, and no responsibility. Men, unless they know God
{49}
in reality, like to believe that, for then they can go their own way and do what they like regardless of any moral issue. “The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?” What will you do at the end, for lies will not always stand, because God is true, and Jesus is true -- the truth is in Jesus -- and the Spirit of God is true.
Someone says, I am not prepared to believe about Jesus. That means, I am not prepared to acknowledge God. Do you know what the Scripture says, “The fool hath said in his heart, there is no God.” I do not apologize for Scripture, for it speaks the truth.
To look up into the heavens, to see the countless hosts of heaven maintained in order and balance, to look indeed at God’s work around you, to consider even your own body, and say there is no God, is folly indeed.
There may be a person here who says
{50}
in his heart, I am not prepared to believe in Christ. I credit you with the desire to be honest in your attitude, and I would ask you to look at this: How many, do you think, have today seriously thought of King George V? He died not many years ago and he was loved by his people. How many people have really thought of him today? A mere handful. That is after so short a time. How many people today have even mentioned the name of General Wolfe? Hundreds of years ago he took Canada from the French -- how many people have thought about him today? Probably not one. Go back further to Columbus. He was a great navigator. Who thinks seriously about him now? Go back to William the Conqueror, or to Alfred the Great. Whoever thinks of them? And yet, nearly two thousand years ago there was Someone here on earth -- laid in a manger when He was born -- He had not where to lay His head on earth -- crucified as a malefactor at His exit from this world.
{51}
Yet millions of people today *love* Him. They would do *anything* for Him. Thousands have died for Him at the stake and in the fire -- have never seen Him and yet have died for Him. Is that a myth? Impossible.
Dear friend, the truth of the matter is that Christ lives in heaven and His Spirit is here. That is why His name does not die. That is why He affects men, women, and children all over the earth irrespectively of rank or race. Now, dear friend, be honest, is this not the truth? Not only is God true and Christ true and the Holy Spirit true, but God has provided for men True Bread and He has shone upon man the True Light and He makes available to men the true riches. Have you got them? or do you so love what is false that what you eat is not bread? As the prophet Isaiah said, “Wherefore do ye spend your money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth not?”
I once asked a man why were not some
{52}
pictures shown of a purely geographical nature, say, of the Antarctic continent. He said, People would not come, and it would not pay. What is unclean attracts the crowds. The apostle Peter indicates that. Men run to the sink of corruption, and they think it strange that Christians do not run with them, see @1 Peter 4: 4.
God has made available the True Bread. What will you do in the end when all that which is not true runs out? Scripture speaks of the True Light that lightens every man. Do you prefer the light that is really darkness? How great is that darkness! Much that professes to be light is darkness -- gross darkness. God has shone in Christ, the True Light.
What will you do in the end, if you continue in that which is not light, but is darkness? God has great riches available for men -- “Riches and honour are with him” -- riches that you can take into another world. Are you going to give your life for the riches of this world which will land
{53}
you in eternal poverty instead of seeking the true riches from Christ? When you stand before God in your poverty in the end, what will you do?
I pass on to the next scripture. Another question is raised. It says, “If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend with horses?” The figure used is clear to everyone. The footmen are running and you are running with them, and you have become tired. If that is the case, how will you contend with horses? I hope there is someone here who has become tired of running with the footmen. The pace is accelerating today. The pace of this world is getting faster and faster, morally as well as literally, and I trust there is someone getting sick and weary of it and would like to find rest. You cannot keep up, you know you cannot. Maybe someone is trying to keep up with its dress, its night life, its evil -- it is getting faster. The horses are coming, indeed, they have come.
{54}
What will you do then, as the pace increases down the steep slopes to perdition? The world position is like the swine spoken of in the gospels -- rushing down a steep slope to the abyss below. You may think you can get out of it or keep at a certain pace. No, you cannot. Many a young man has started, only intending to go a certain distance, but the slope got so steep that he could not stop. I have seen such young men and women -- oh, the anguish as you see them! The pace grows and they are swept down with it.
The prophet says, “if in the land of peace” they weary thee; when there is a measure of order and peace you grow weary with the world of sin and darkness and Satan’s power; you have not been able to cope with it, “how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?” We all know, I suppose, that the Jordan, in Scripture, means death, that river overflows its banks and you never know who is going to be swept into its current from day to day. What
{55}
will you do when death comes? What can anyone do? I have been in the presence of death a good many times, when men of profound ability come in and can do nothing at all. They would do something if they could. When you are caught in this current, you must meet it alone. Your husband cannot go with you, your wife cannot go with you, your children cannot go with you, your parents cannot go with you, your friends cannot go with you. What will you do? There is One that can go with you; He has promised to go with every one of His own. “When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee.”
I have seen men and women go down into the realm of death with a shout of victory. A middle-aged Christian man said to his friends recently, as about to die. Give my love to -- and tell them I would not change places with anybody. He was gone in a few hours and he knew he was going. Is that a myth? Dear friends, in
{56}
the presence of death you cannot be unreal.
We read in the Scriptures of a father whose daughter lay dying. He heard the roar of Jordan as it overflowed its banks and came near his house, and he knew that his daughter would be swept away by its current. She was only twelve -- children are not exempt; all ages are affected, so that everybody should listen to the voice of death. The man could not do anything, but he believed in Christ, who was then on earth, and he came down to Christ and said, My daughter is at extremity, she is just at the point of passing out of this world for ever -- come down and lay Thy hand on her. No one else can do anything. As they drew near, there came those out of the house who said, “Thy daughter is dead; trouble not the Master,” but Jesus said, “Be not afraid, only believe.” He went in and said, “She is not dead, but sleepeth,” and they laughed Him to scorn.
The Lord was speaking in a language that we can understand. When a person is
{57}
asleep, you go into their room, you say, So-and-so is asleep, and it does not worry you, even if they oversleep, because if you really want to wake them up, you can go in and call them. What sleep is to man, death is to God. God can awake the dead. The Lord Jesus went in and called her. They knew she was dead, and she was, as men say, but she was not beyond call in God’s sight. The Lord said, “Maid, arise,” and it says, “her spirit came again, and she arose.” Dear friend, are you prepared to say that is a lie? that the precious Scriptures are a lie? and that what Christ said is a lie? You may say that because you want to believe it; be willingly ignorant -- because, if Christ can raise the dead, *you* must have to say to Him. “As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God,” @Romans 14: 11.
Now, dear friend, “how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?” You say, Well, when that moment comes (and it must
{58}
come if the Lord tarry) I will turn to Him. I would not and could not say that He would not hear you, but I do not know whether you would have time to turn to Him. I would say, if you want Him then, is not He worth having now? Are you going to say, I want the world of sin and my own will to the last minute of my life, then I want Him? If you want Him at the greatest moment of your life -- if you want Christ then, and you will, for no one else can help you then -- why not have Him now? If He is worthy of your faith then, when everybody else must leave you, is not He worthy of your trust and obedience now? It is sad to think of many young persons who really want the Lord when they die, yet live ten, twenty, thirty, forty years, not interested in Him, not prepared to break with the world and give up a pathway of sin. You cannot have the Lord and go on in sin. You cannot live in a world that hates Him, which would fain cast Him out, and enjoy His world. You cannot
{59}
serve two masters, either you will hate the one and love the other, or hold to the one and despise the other, @Luke 16: 13.
If you want the Lord in the hour of death, why not have Him in your life? He is worthy of your life. That is what Saul of Tarsus came to. He did not say, I will put this off until the end, but “that He died for all that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose again.” That was Paul’s judgment. I hope that is your judgment. As Paul says, “I beseech you therefore ... by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,” @Romans 12: 1.
{60}
KEYS
@Luke 11: 52; @Revelation 1: 17, 18; @Revelation 3: 7; @Revelation 20: 1 - 3
When God conveys a message to men, He does it in language that is intelligible to them. In accordance with His goodness, to us as His creatures. He uses figures and signs and symbols which we can understand. He speaks of Himself as having certain “keys”, and I would like to speak to you of some of the keys of which the Lord has control. What a key means to us, is what the Lord means to convey to us when He uses the figure. Anyone who has a key to a thing has control of it. If you have the key of a house, or a room, you can come into it when you like. So when the Lord is presented as having certain keys, we recognize that He has control of the matters referred to.
Now the first key I would refer to is the “key of knowledge” of which the Lord speaks in @Luke 11: 52. He is speaking to the lawyers about it, bringing home to them that they had taken it away from men; that is, they had rigidly excluded Himself from
{61}
their teaching and doctrine, whereas He has control of all true knowledge, and He can let men into it. We are living in days of increased knowledge, as the Scriptures foretold: “many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased”, @Daniel 12: 4. The increase of human knowledge in the last fifty years has astounded mankind, and if God allows it, there will be more to come. Nevertheless, the Lord Jesus Christ has the key of knowledge, and the control of all that is of permanent value. I want to show that He is prepared to open the door of knowledge to *you*, to bring you into a knowledge that is of eternal value.
First of all then, the Lord is the One who has the key to the knowledge of *God* -- He knows God. He said when here on earth, “I know him”, @John 8: 55. The Lord Jesus knows God absolutely. Others have known Him to some extent, and indeed, all true prosperity and growth in a christian is by the knowledge of God. The apostle Peter says, “Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ”. And again, “Grace and peace be multiplied unto you through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord”, @2 Peter 1: 2. We know little of God, but the Lord Jesus knew Him
{62}
perfectly: “I know him”, He says. He knew His eternal counsels; He was “with God”; He knows the present and the future: He knows everything. Many human calculations are based on assumption; there was never any guesswork with Christ. He never supposed anything; He never assumed anything. He said, “we speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen”, @John 3: 11.
Then the Lord knows *you*. When Jesus saw Nathanael coming to Him in @John 1: 47, He said, “Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile”! Nathanael said, “Whence knowest thou me?” Jesus answered and said unto him, “Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee”. He not only knew where he was, but He knew what was in him. He looked behind the exterior into his heart, and says of him, “an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile”. Again, when Nicodemus came to Jesus by night, as the Lord spoke to him, he said “How can these things be?” And Jesus said, “Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that we do know ... If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things?” Think of One who can tell you
{63}
what is in heaven, as well as what is on earth! He said to the publicans and sinners who drew near to hear Him, “there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth”. He could speak of the joy in heaven over one repenting sinner.
In @John 4 He disclosed to a poor sinful woman that He knew all her history. Later, she says, “Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did”. He can unlock your past, and show you all that lies hidden there, but He would bring in the knowledge of God, so that you might be brought back to God. What I want to say is that if you want a true knowledge of God, you must come to Christ, because He alone has the key. Every other kind of knowledge will disappear. “Knowledge ... shall vanish away” we are told in @1 Corinthians 13: 8, but the knowledge that Christ imparts will never vanish. He will tell you about God, and about how He would meet your need, as He did that poor woman at the well of Sychar. The Lord said to her, You are thirsty: I know it, but if you knew who *I* am, and what I could give you, you would have asked of me, and I would give you “a well of water springing up into everlasting life”.
Dear friend, before one can get that water,
{64}
we must face His scrutiny. You will have to do with Him as the One who *knows*. The woman said to Him, “Sir, give me this water”. But the Lord answered, “Go, call thy husband”; and then all the truth came out, and she realised that He knew everything about her. Are *you* prepared to face this? He looks into your heart and knows all your history, but above all, He knows God, and can tell you all about God, and bring you back to Him. “Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God”. That is where the Lord would lead you by His knowledge. One would say to the young, the key of knowledge is in the hands of Christ, not with the universities, nor in the schools. He alone can open to you the door of knowledge into that which will abide, and bring you into everlasting joy; He will put treasure into your soul; so that “Let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord”, @Jeremiah 9: 24. To get such knowledge as that is worth all the schools can give you. Not that I would decry the knowledge necessary to this present life, but Christ will give you that which abides and is of eternal value -- the knowledge of God to which He alone has the key.
{65}
Now in @Revelation 1 we have two more keys spoken of. The Lord says in verse 18, “I ... have the keys of hell and of death”. Let us not make Him a liar. Have you ever stopped to think that if we say something different to what the Scripture says. God says, we “make him a liar”, @1 John 1: 10. But God “cannot lie”, @Titus 1: 2. You can lie, the greatest man on earth can lie, its teachers and its religious leaders can lie, but Scripture says, “Let God be true, but every man a liar”. If you are to be blessed you must believe what God says, even though it involves your disbelieving every man, for be assured that God “cannot lie”. What a rock for your soul to rest on, that it is “impossible for God to lie”, @Hebrews 6: 18. The apostle Paul says of the Lord Jesus that He is “over all, God blessed for ever”. And the Lord Himself when here said, “Before Abraham was, I am” -- indeed He said more, “If ye believe not that I am ... ye shall die in your sins”, @John 8: 24. “I am” means that He is the Eternal, the One who is not under the restrictions of time, and never was, for Jesus is God.
Well, the Lord speaking to His servant John in @Revelation 1, says, “I ... have the keys of hell and death”. He is the only one
{66}
who has them. Death refers to the body; it is the condition of the body when life ebbs out; but hades refers to the condition and place of the spirit after death. Death and hades refer to the separation of the spirit from the body. Perhaps someone says, I do not believe there is any spirit, for I cannot see it. Then you only believe what you can see with your eyes. Have you ever found the atmosphere? or life? or electricity? The greatest things around, and in us, are invisible -- we cannot see them. Get a grain of wheat and search for the life in it. Who can find life? Nobody! The very thing that makes life possible, that is the atmosphere, where is it? We cannot see it, or handle it. Is there then no God because you cannot see Him? Consider the heavens -- Is there no God? What a fallacy! The truth is that God IS; and another truth is that the Lord Jesus Christ has the control of death and hell, and when death comes to pass, we come directly under His control. If this is so, what folly it is to live without Christ! Perhaps you choose to live without Him for twenty or thirty, or even for seventy years, yet when death comes to pass, you will pass under His immediate control. He has the keys of death and of hades.
{67}
The Lord made this perfectly clear when He was here. You will remember Jairus, the ruler of the synagogue who sent to Him when his daughter lay dead. When He came into the presence of death we read, He “took her by the hand and called, saying, Maid arise”. And it says, “her spirit came again, and she arose straightway”. That is, He unlocked hades and let that one soul out. And He could do that for all who are in it. He called to Lazarus in @John 11: “he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. And he that was dead came forth”. The same power that called Lazarus from the tomb, will yet call all, “for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth”, @John 5: 28.
Why waste your life in indifference to Christ, the only one who knows? -- the One who has the keys of death, and who has disclosed that on the other side of it there are two conditions, and that between them there is a “great gulf fixed”. Scripture calls one side paradise, and the other side hell. On one side is eternal blessedness and joy, and on the other is remorse and torment. The Lord is Master of that situation, and He alone. You are nearer to it than you perhaps realize; indeed, there may be only one step
{68}
between you and death; as David said. “there is but a step between me and death”. But you must have to do with the Lord, for He has the keys of death, and has the entire control when death comes. God may let you have your own will here for a time, but when death comes you pass absolutely under the control of Christ. Why then waste your life under the dominion of Satan and darkness? Why not come to Christ now? If you must have to do with Him eventually, why not come to Him in this day of salvation?
Then in @Revelation 3, He speaks of Himself as having the “key of David”, which means that He has control of God’s kingdom. God has a kingdom; He is the “King eternal”; He never abdicates, as earthly monarchs sometimes do. His throne is for ever and ever; as Nebuchadnezzar said, “His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom”; and “I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the King of heaven, all whose works are truth, and his ways judgment”. The key of the kingdom of heaven is in the hands of Christ, and He determines whether you shall come in or not. He who “openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth”. If He opens the door to you, then no one can shut you out, but if He shuts the
{69}
door, then nobody can open it. Have you ever tried to get into the kingdom? The Lord Jesus said, “the violent take it by force”; that means there are some who are desperate in their efforts, and are so earnest that they will not rest till they have got into God’s kingdom. The Lord Jesus has the key to it, and the way into the kingdom is to call Jesus “Lord”. “If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved”, @Romans 10: 9. You own His authority over you and come into salvation. You need not fear that any enemies will get you while you are in God’s kingdom; His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom; and His subjects are safe from the lawless powers of evil that would seek to destroy them.
See that dying robber -- he discovered the Lord like this. He awoke to the fact that Jesus knew everything, that He knew all about him; that he was in the presence of God. He says to his fellow, “we receive the due reward of our deeds”. What made him think of his deeds? He was in the presence of the One who exposes everything. He was conscious that the Lord knew
{70}
him. He says, “Lord remember me”. He recognized that the Lord had such grace that He would remember even him. Then he discovered that he had the keys of death and hell, although the Lord Jesus was about to die, and the other robber too; he reckons that the Lord is to have a kingdom, and his faith embraces the Lord in this way. He discovered the One with the key of David, and that One lets him into God’s kingdom, and he calls Him “Lord”!
My friend, you have no chance of getting into God’s kingdom unless you own Jesus as Lord. Is He your Lord? -- that is the question. Those who come into the kingdom of God, are those who confess Jesus as Lord. He is the Lord of all; the acceptance of Christ in your soul, as your own Lord, gives you access to God’s kingdom. You cannot continue under the dominion of sin and the dominion of the Lord at the same time; you cannot go on with evil and be subject to Christ at the same time. That is impossible. Anyone who teaches that, is darkening your soul in view of your destruction. Your salvation lies in Christ becoming your Lord; and not only so, but you own Him so, in the presence of His enemies. As Christ becomes Lord to you, you come into the kingdom which is greater than any other kingdom; He
{71}
has the key of David, and He opens and no man can shut, and if He shuts, no man can open.
In @Revelation 20 we read of the angel that came down with the key of the bottomless pit, or the abyss, and he shut up in that abyss the devil, the source of evil, for a thousand years. I only draw attention to that to show you the greatness of Christ, for the angels are His servants. It says of the Lord that He will come in His glory and all the holy angels with Him -- they are *His* angels. When the Lord was born in Bethlehem, the angel referred to Jesus as “Lord”. “Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord”. And so at His death they said, “Come, see the place where the Lord lay”. The angels are His servants, and He gives one of His servants this key to the abyss, that discloses that He had control of evil. Indeed He shuts up for a thousand years the whole influence of evil, by His own power. What an unfolding of the greatness of Christ, that He can deal with the source of evil! He will yet remove from God’s universe all evil. The One who has the key to the abyss has power to do this.
{72}
The question you need to face is, Will *you* be shut out? There are those who will be shut out; those who stand by their own course of sin, with the old serpent, the devil and Satan. Scripture speaks of a certain place where the devil and his angels are. It says, “And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone ... and shall be tormented day and night for ever”, @Revelation 20: 10. It is a place of outer darkness, and the Lord has the key of that. He has the means of excluding evil as well as of opening the door to God’s kingdom. He has the power that gives Him access to death and hades, and He can open the door of knowledge to your soul.
There is one key that the Lord does not choose to control, that He leaves with you, and that is the key of your heart. He does not take that from you. He stands at the door and knocks, He does it continually. He does not force Himself into the human heart. He says, “Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking”. You have the key of your own affections, and even though you may have bolted the door against this blessed Person, yet such is His grace that He still knocks, and says, If any man open the door I will come in. My friend, let the appeal
{73}
come home to you, “If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me”, @Revelation 3: 20.
May the Lord help you to open the door of your heart, the door of your whole being, and let Him come in, and He will take control of you, giving you a place in God’s kingdom, bringing you into all the blessedness of the knowledge of God. I would commend Him to you, so that you may turn to Him and receive Him. It says, “As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God”, @John 1: 12.
