{#TWO KINGS}
{3}
WISDOM'S VOICE
"Hear, for I will speak of excellent things."
@Proverbs 8: 6-8; @Luke 7: 35; @John 4: 1-15
One has observed for some time the great importance of our ears being opened to the voice of God. It is evident from the scriptures that the first move of Satan to capture man for himself was by way of his ear. Before he got his eye or his heart, he got his ear; he said in a subtle way, "Yea, hath God said?" He put a word into the ear of man, and from his ear it went into his heart. Recovery to God begins that way; the word goes out to every one, "Hear and your soul shall live." No one lives (in his soul) except on the principle of faith -- "The just shall live by faith;"
{4}
but faith comes by hearing, and as the word of God comes into our ears -- one of course does not speak in a material sense -- as the message from God comes into our ears and is received, light breaks in upon the soul. So that it is of great importance *what* we are listening to, what we are giving our ear to.
The Lord Jesus, when He was here upon earth, seemed to feel more than most conditions that He found man in, the fact that he was *deaf*. In His movements amongst men He came into touch with all sorts and conditions, some of them terrible. Think of the man who was full of leprosy, of another who was possessed with a legion of demons, and of others who were blind! But in only one case, except at the grave of Lazarus, did the Lord groan, and that was in the case of a deaf man. These two things seemed to come home to the spirit of the Lord as being more terrible than any other conditions that
{5}
He met with. You will remember the occasion when they brought to Him a deaf man who had an impediment in his speech, and the Lord Jesus, taking him aside, put his fingers into his ears, and looking up to heaven He groaned, and said "Ephphatha," that is, Be opened. (@Mark 7: 34.) I think the Lord would teach us through that, what God feels about the deafness of the ears of man. But although the Lord Jesus was there feeling the conditions so acutely, He was there to open the deaf ears, and He is here tonight in Spirit with the same intent; He is here in grace in the gospel to put His fingers into your ears, so that those ears of yours, which have been closed to His message for so long, and into which He has caused His word to come, but hitherto without effect, might be opened to hear His word.
I would entreat every one of my hearers to let the Lord Jesus do this
{6}
blessed work. He is ready to do it. He sent the message to John "The deaf hear" (@Matthew 11: 5) There are many in this room who have already heard, and the Lord is present in the power of the Spirit of God with the finger of God to put in your ear, so that you too might hear the word. You will *need* to hear dear friend, He is calling to you today. Think of God calling! What a wonderful thing! That God should command, we can understand; that He should dictate to His creature is intelligible; but God is *calling*. "Because I have called;" He is calling to you. If you close your ears, if you refuse to hear His word, *you* will call -- you will indeed, dear friend -- but He will not hear, "Ye refused... then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer." (@Proverbs 1: 24-28)
His word is that as the tree falls, so it lies; whether it be to the south or to the north there it shall be (@Ecclesiastes 11: 3.)
{7}
I would call your attention to that, "where the tree falleth." Who can tell when you will fall? A tree in scripture always speaks of man. I do not know, no one knows when you may fall; but where you fall, there you lie, whether toward the south, or toward the north. When men have to fall, God would have them fall toward the south; He would have them fall in His blessing, in His favour, that there they may be for ever. The thief upon the cross illustrates that. He was about to fall, he looked into death, it was at hand, but he opened his ear to the word of God; he heard and he lived. He fell toward the south, into the favour of God. But the word is, "where the tree falleth, there it shall be" so that you will need to hear the word of God.
There are many other voices today claiming men's ears, and because God's word is being turned away from, men have itching ears, itching to hear the
{8}
next thing -- words that are generally words of deceit -- great swelling words of vanity, words that magnify man in his own eyes. The first statement of evil that was ever uttered in God's universe was this, "I will ascend" (@Isaiah 14: 13.) And there are many such words today everywhere, and men are bowing their itching ears to listen to them, great swelling words of vanity that honour man, that cause man to become greater and greater in his own eyes, and lead him away from God, alluring through the lusts of the flesh. Beware of giving your ear to those words!
But in the scripture we read in @Proverbs 8 it says, "Hear; for I will speak of excellent things." These are the things -- or at least a few of them -- that I would like to speak of at this time. Excellent things! "Excellent" is superlative; it means there are no better things to be said. You may have the good words and fair speeches
{9}
in deceit all around; for from the universities, from the scientists, from all parts of the earth, the scene is flooded with these, but they come up from the pit; that is the source from which they originate. But the Lord Jesus, presented as Wisdom, says "Hear; for *I will speak* of excellent things." There is only One who can speak of excellent things, and that is Christ, and He would speak into your ear tonight. That is what the gospel is for -- that the Lord Jesus should speak in your ear a word of *excellence*.
Now I want to take up in a few words these two incidents we read in the gospels, as being two of the "excellent things" of which Wisdom speaks. There are many more; eternity will be filled in listening to the excellent things of Wisdom, but there are two in these scriptures which are excellent, which came from the lips of the Lord Jesus. One is, "Thy sins are forgiven." To the heart of a sinner
{10}
with the thought of his sins upon his conscience, no better word could be said than that. The Lord Jesus is there in @Luke 7, to speak into the ear and into the heart of a poor guilty sinner these excellent words, "Thy sins are forgiven," and to any sinner stricken with the sense of guilt before God, the Lord Jesus would convey that message to your ear and to your heart *now*, "Thy sins are forgiven."
The other "excellent word" in @John 4 is this -- "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldst have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water." Living water is an excellent thing to a thirsty soul, to a heart that is dissatisfied, to a heart that is wanting something, it knows not what. But the Lord Jesus understands -- as He alone fully understands the heart of man -- and says He would give "living water". "The water that I shall give him shall be
{11}
in him a well of. water, springing up into everlasting life."
Now these two things are excellent. There is no possibility of anything better being said in regard to these two states -- to a sinner with the sense of the guilt of his sins, and to an unsatisfied thirsty heart. To the one He says, "Thy sins are forgiven," and to the other He gives the living water, so that he does not thirst again for ever. Can you have better words to listen to than these?
Now the Lord Jesus in @Luke 7 came into the house of Simon the Pharisee. He came there as Wisdom. In the same chapter He speaks of that; He appropriates the title because it was His. "Wisdom," He says, "is justified of all her children." He was the wisdom of God and the power of God, and God's Wisdom walked into the house of Simon the Pharisee. I know Simon did not know it, but that was the truth. Wisdom is resource;
{12}
it indicates that the one who has it is never at a loss. It is like money. "Wisdom is a defence, and money is a defence" (@Ecclesiastes 7: 12). In connection with material things, a man with money is never at a loss; he can find a way out somehow; and wisdom is like that in connection with moral questions that arise. The Lord Jesus walked through this world as God's wisdom; He never was at a loss. You can gather up that in the gospels in every incident that arose. If men spoke about the past, He knew what to say; if they spoke about the present, He had a word of wisdom; if they spoke about the future state, as they did in regard of the resurrection, they found they were in the presence of wisdom. Whatever conditions were created, the Lord Jesus as the occasion arose always knew what He would do, for He was wisdom. In a patronising way, this Pharisee had invited Him to come to his house. He would patronise the Lord. I wonder
{13}
if there is any one here like that, feeling that they are doing something in coming to the meetings? Moving about, one hears people speaking like that, half apologising for going to church, as if God should be greatly obliged to them! That is just how this Pharisee felt, doing a great favour to have the wisdom of God and the power of God come into his house -- a great favour to the Lord! Nevertheless the Lord came; He came in grace.
And the Lord Jesus took account of how He was received. There was nothing in the heart of Simon to appreciate who was there. There was no water for His feet, no common courtesies of the day for Him, no kiss, no affection in Simon's heart for Christ, no oil for His head, no recognition of His dignity. The Lord saw all, felt all, but said nothing. Perhaps that is how some here have been treating Him; coming to the meetings, it may be, now and again, but no appreciation
{14}
of Christ in your heart, no affection there for Him, no sense of His great majesty and glory. Well, the Lord observed it as I said; He sat down to meat, and we read, "Behold, a woman in the city which was a sinner... stood at his feet behind him weeping." She had been following Him, for it says she came behind Him. She had followed those blessed footsteps that had attracted her. They were the beautiful feet of Him that publisheth glad tidings of peace. She had watched Him in His footsteps of grace through this world, and in the presence of that boundless grace that had come to her in the person of Jesus, she had discovered the wickedness of her own heart. She followed Jesus, and stood behind Him, "and began to wash his feet with tears." Those tears, I am sure were mingled; some were tears of joy to think of the grace of heaven that had come to her in Jesus; others were tears of repentance and sorrow in connection with the wickedness of her
{15}
own life and the guilt of her sins; and the two combined were poured upon the feet of that blessed Person. Then she wiped them with the hairs of her head, and kissed them; expressing in that way the appreciation of her heart for those feet that had come that journey of grace; then she anointed them with the ointment.
The Lord was noting all, taking full account of her every act; not a movement escaped His notice, and then He turned to the woman and spoke to Simon. Simon was saying in his heart, or as the scripture puts it "he spake within himself, saying, this man, if he were a prophet" ...Dear friend, the Lord knows what you say in your heart. Satan said in his heart -- we are not told he ever actually said it with his lips -- "I will ascend." And this man was sitting there speaking within himself. When you get into the presence of God, what you say within yourself is known. You might
{16}
be ever so careful what you say to others, but what you say within yourself is known, for "all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do." So the Lord says to Simon, "Simon I have somewhat to say unto *thee*." Wonderful grace! One sometimes feels that that is grace as great as His grace to the woman. Here is a man who despises Christ, a man who patronises Him, a man who has no appreciation of the journey He has taken, no affection in his heart, no sense of His dignity, yet the Lord says to him, "Simon I have somewhat to say unto *thee*." And do you know what He says to Simon? He conveyed to him that God was prepared to forgive him.
Think of that! A heart that despised Christ, that did not beat with a throb of affection for Jesus, that had no oil for His blessed head, no water for His feet, yet the Lord says to
{17}
him, the mind of God, the heart of God towards you is *forgiveness*.
That is really the testimony that came out at the cross. At the cross of Calvary there was no water for the feet of Jesus from the hearts of men in this world; instead of water for those blessed feet that had come the whole journey, "they pierced," He says, "my hands and my feet" -- those blessed hands that had been outstretched in divine goodness, those blessed feet that had travelled right to where man was with the goodness of God. There was no kiss of affection from the hearts of men there -- they spat on His blessed face. "I hid not my face," the Lord says, "from shame and spitting." There was no oil for His blessed head -- they crowned Him with thorns. Instead of the dignity that was proper to that blessed head, they put upon Him the expression of the curse that had come upon this scene through the wickedness of man -- a crown of thorns. The Lord Jesus
{18}
speaks there -- on the cross -- words of such excellence that they ought to ring in every heart, and ring, AND RING, AND RING, till men fall down at the feet of Jesus, "Hear, and I will speak of excellent things." "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do!" These are the words that came from the lips of Jesus on Calvary. In that blessed heart which was in exact correspondence with the heart of God, there was *forgiveness* for those who expressed the hatred of their hearts to Him there. "Excellent words!" Surely nothing to be compared with them has ever come from any other lips.
So the Lord Jesus turns to the woman; He had appreciated fully how she had followed Him. He knew her sins, He could count every one of them. "Five hundred pence" -- He knew exactly how to weigh up her guilt. Simon said He "would have known;" but the Lord Jesus knew
{19}
Simon's guilt, and Simon's thoughts; and He knew the woman's guilt, and the woman's thoughts. He spoke of her washing his feet with her tears, and then He says, "This woman since I came in *hath not ceased* to kiss my feet." Some of us perhaps did once kiss those blessed feet, that brought to us the grace of God. Have we ceased? If we have ceased, then our affections will be bound to turn somewhere else. Many a Christian has lent his ear to some other word, has followed some other feet, but the Lord says of this woman that she "*hath not ceased* to kiss my feet." And He turns to her and says those excellent words, "Thy sins are forgiven."
Now dear friends, the Lord is prepared to say that to you. It is not recorded, and we do not know that Simon ever received the forgiveness of sins, but it was there in the heart of God, in the heart of Christ for him: The gospel is preached so that you
{20}
might *receive* the forgiveness of sins; it is like a gift put out for you to take. The woman received it; the Lord said to her "Thy sins are forgiven, ...thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace." The Lord is prepared to say that. God has a great name; no one can tell how great His name is. "What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst tell?" No one can tell, but part of His great name is this, that He forgives iniquity and transgression and sin. God has a name to forgive; "But there is forgiveness with thee." (@Psalm 130: 4) He has fame for forgiving. That is the idea of a name; when people have a name it means they have renown, fame; they have some distinguishing glory, whatever it may be. So God has great fame for forgiveness. You remember, when Moses said, "Shew me thy glory," God said, "I will proclaim my name before thee;" and this was part of it, "Forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin." And the Lord Jesus has
{21}
a name like that. "What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst tell?" The son's name is exactly the same. If you went through the scriptures and gathered up all the names of God, you would find they were just as true of Jesus -- there is no difference. God has renown for forgiving, and the Lord Jesus has renown for forgiving; and He is prepared to forgive. Forgiveness is one of those "excellent things" that He would speak to the hearts of men.
Now I would like to pass on for a moment to speak of the woman in @John 4. She is not brought in as one who was troubled about her sins -- I do not mean that she should not have been -- but that is not the point for which the Spirit of God draws attention to her. The point in her case was different to that of the woman in @Luke 7. One observes that both these cases are women, indicating that what is brought out in them sets forth
{22}
deep lessons that have to be learned; deep secret exercises of heart with God. In scripture the woman sets forth what is behind the scenes, the man what is public. This question of sins and forgiveness, is a deeply secret exercise of soul. But this other woman is one who is unsatisfied. She admits it; she says, "Give me this water *that I thirst not*." She had drunk of many streams. She had drunk out of what was good so far as it went; she had sought to satisfy her heart with natural relationships, which are of God; but she found that death was upon them and that one after the other they disappeared, and instead of being satisfied, the bitterness of death came into her heart. Then when these failed, she turned to the sink of corruption into which men run. Peter speaks of them thinking it strange "that ye run not with them to the same sink of corruption." (@1 Peter 4: 4. N.T.) That is where men run to satisfy their hearts when earth fails.
{23}
Home, family, business, pleasure, they try but they are not satisfied, something else is wanted, they do not quite know what. Men, and women too, will then try the sink of corruption, to see if they can get something out of that. Of course it is not labelled that in the world; it is the Spirit of God who puts that label on it, and it is true, because all His words are in truth.
But, you say, it is only a simple novel -- it might even be a religious one, but it is running to satisfy the heart -- at the sink of corruption that is in this world. When God's judgment came upon Egypt, one has observed (and I trust with solemnity) that every drop of water in Egypt, not only the river, was turned into blood. The river represents a course -- the course of this world -- including the racecourse, the theatres, the public houses, and so on -- that great river that keeps the life of the world going. Note, in this chapter, it is
{24}
not a question of what we eat, it is what we drink. Drink is not exactly to build up life, it is refreshment. Everybody would admit that the river has been turned into blood, but it says "their ponds, and all their pools" (@Exodus 7: 19) -- those little tiny spots with just a little drop of water in them -- the Spirit of God says they were *all* turned into blood; and any one who drinks out of them drinks death. That explains often why even a Christian begins to die spiritually -- he is drinking often out of the pond. He is not seen going to the theatre or the like, but he has got a little pond, perhaps a little book on evolution in his library which he dips into just as a matter of interest, or some little article in the line of modern thought -- those great swelling words that are coming out. He does not intend to pursue it much, but he is just dipping out of the pond. This poor woman had tried many of these things, but still she says, "I thirst."
{25}
And the Lord Jesus says to her, "The water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life," in other words I am prepared to satisfy your heart for ever. "Whosoever drinks of the water which I shall give him shall never thirst for ever." Now that is an "excellent word." You could not find a better word than that for a thirsty heart, and the Lord Jesus says it to every heart here; for He is prepared to give living water, so that you shall never thirst for ever.
But the scripture we read in @Proverbs 8 says, "All the words of my mouth are in righteousness." Now come back to our scripture, in @Luke 7. "Thy sins are forgiven." You say, that is grace? It is dear friends, but the Lord assures us that every single word that He utters is in righteousness. How can God say righteously, "Thy sins are forgiven?" Do you know where her sins went --
{26}
where the sins of the believer go? In the Old Testament there are two sacrifices that are used to teach us this (@Leviticus 16.) One goat was slain as a sacrifice for sin, and the other goat had the sins laid upon its head by the priest, and a fit man took that goat into a land not inhabited. Now that is where the question of righteousness comes in. The Lord Jesus with those blessed feet has taken the journey, first of all into that land not inhabited. He was the "fit man," and the only fit Man, and He was the sacrifice too. He went out, on the one hand carrying the sins of all those who put their trust in Him into a land where they will never be found; and on the other, He died for our sins. "Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree." "Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures." So that God says afterwards, "The iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah,
{27}
and they shall *not be found*" (@Jeremiah 1: 20). That is God speaking -- God, with eyes that run to and fro throughout the whole earth, says He cannot find the believer's sins. They are gone into a land not inhabited, which means the land that God never goes into; it is not a question of whether men go there, but God does not go there: It is to teach us that God has put sins away where He cannot find them, and if He cannot find them, we have no need to be concerned about them. "Thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea" (@Micah 7: 19). So the Lord says, "All the words of my mouth are in righteousness." His blessed sacrifice has secured a righteous basis for Him to say, "Thy sins are forgiven."
Now what is the effect of following those blessed feet to that goal? The effect is that you never cease to kiss them. That dear woman would come into the further light of it afterwards
{28}
when the Spirit came, and she would never cease kissing the blessed feet of Jesus, that carried Him into that dark and distant land on the one hand, and down into death on the other, to put her sins away. The effect is that she loves Him. Forgiveness of sins is not merely to relieve our consciences, it is to secure our hearts for Christ. So the Lord says "Tell me, therefore, which of them will love him most?" He wanted not simply that she should be happy in the sense of forgiveness, though she was blessedly happy, but He would secure the affections of men's hearts for Himself, by the journey that He has taken in grace to put their sins away. One can understand, in the light of the sacrifice of Christ, how the apostle should speak so solemnly of those who do not love Him. "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha."
In the other case, the Lord says, "The water that I shall give him
{29}
shall be in him a well of water." He refers to the gift of the Holy Spirit as living water, to shed abroad in the heart of the believer the love of God, so that he is never again dissatisfied and never thirsts again. And "all the words... are in righteousness." Think of God having a righteous ground upon which to give men the Holy Spirit! Not simply doing it in grace and bounty, though He does that, but every word being in righteousness. He is righteous to give the Spirit of God, so that the love of God might be shed abroad in their hearts, that there might be a living link with heaven, a living link with Christ in their hearts, and that they might never thirst again. That takes us to the ground upon which God makes the water flow -- the ground upon which He gives the Spirit which we find in type in @Exodus 17. There amid the murmurings and discontent of the people -- hearts like this woman -- God said I will satisfy them, I will
{30}
stop their murmurings. So He tells Moses to take the rod, and go to the rock, "*Behold I will stand before thee there upon the rock*, in Horeb and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it." The rock, we know, was Christ, and the rod of God that fell with such power upon Egypt so that its power was broken, fell too with such power upon the waters of the Red Sea that they gave way before it -- the rod of God's holy government, of God's judgment, fell upon the rock. The Lord Jesus was smitten by the rod of God. God says, I will be there. It was by divine appointment. It does not refer to that awful scene of Calvary as enacted by the hands of heartless men, but it refers to what the Lord Jesus suffered there at the hand of God. The rod of God fell with all its terrible power upon the only One who could bear it. If it were to fall upon you, dear hearer, it would send you into everlasting judgment, into the
{31}
lake of fire for ever. When God's judgment visits this earth, it says, "The great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?" Who could stand when the rod of God comes down upon men? Only the Rock -- no other one. That blessed Rock bore the smiting of divine wrath and judgment. Matthew and Mark give us the forsaking, and the darkness, and the distance -- the smiting of the Rock -- but Luke shows us that when the smiting is over the Rock still stands immutable. And after the smiting is over; the words from the Rock are these, "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit." The Rock did not break up. Everyone else would have been scattered to eternal judgment under the rod of God, but the Rock stood; He bore the judgment, exhausted it, and came out of it unconsumed, and that provided in the sight of God a righteous ground to give men the Holy Spirit. Their state of sin and murmuring and evil
{32}
has been judged. He who knew no sin was made sin. He took that state to which God could never give the Spirit, and in His death that state was judged and put away. The wrath of God came upon that condition in the sacrifice of Christ, and because of that, God can now in righteousness impart the Spirit; the Spirit can be given as living water, so that we thirst not, "neither come hither to draw."
May the Lord help us each one to listen with the ears of our hearts to those "excellent things!" For the sinner troubled about his sins there is forgiveness, so that he might love Christ for ever; for the heart that is unsatisfied and thirsty, there is the Spirit of God, so that not only does he not thirst but he worships by the Spirit of God. One is to teach us to love Christ, and the other to teach us to worship God. "God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and in truth."
W. J. House
{33}
TWO KINGS
@Revelation 9: 1-11; @Acts 17: 1-8
I think I am beginning to value the Book of the Revelation more than ever. God saw that anyone who would serve Him at the end of the dispensation would need this book. It says it is the revelation which God gave to Jesus Christ, to shew unto His servants things which must shortly come to pass. That is to say, if any one was to serve God intelligently, in a time that was shortly to come, they would need this revelation. The great value of it is this, that it expresses the true character of everything. It is as if God, who sees everything perfectly, tears away the mask
{34}
which Satan has put upon evil, and shews things in their true character.
I want to shew that in divine reckoning there are two powers that bear rule over the souls of men. I am referring to the control that exists over every man's soul. The Revelation makes clear that there are two great powers that have rule over the souls of men. The one is Abaddon, in the Hebrew tongue, and in the Greek Apollyon. They both mean the same, but the Spirit of God has put it like this to show that this great ruler has dominion over Jew and Gentile, that is, over all men. His sphere extends to every man. The meaning of the name is the destroyer.
Scripture tells us where the
{35}
seat of his power lies. It says he is the angel of the bottomless pit. Of course I know very well that he does not move amongst men telling them that he has come from the bottomless pit and has come to destroy them. He is transformed into an angel of light, and His ministers into ministers of righteousness, but in the Revelation God takes the mask away, and He exposes the true position.
I would like you to have some idea of what is meant by the bottomless pit. It is not a material thing; it is not anything to do with what is physical. It means that the source of Satan's influence and the place where he has his seat is down in the depths of darkness and sin and
{36}
ruin, depths that cannot be measured. I would like you to take a note of that word "bottomless" -- down, down, down, where there is no bottom. I say again, I do not refer to what is physical. It is to give us a sense of where Satan's influences come from. Bottomless! And in that bottomless pit it says they have a king, and his name is the destroyer. Out of that awful depth which no one can fathom, comes up a smoke which darkens the sun and the air, and out of the smoke come influences, powers that are the servants of Apollyon for the destruction of men.
I want also to call attention to another king. Paul preached that there was "another king, one Jesus." The place from whence
{37}
He came and the place to which He belongs, is far above all heavens. He is called in the Gospel of Luke the Son of the Highest. That again does not allude to what is physical. It refers to heights of glory, and power and blessedness. Scripture speaks of the third heaven, and the heaven of heavens, and far above all heavens. That is the place from which Jesus came. That is the place where the King whom Paul preached had His home and His seat, and His name is called Jesus.
*Another King*, one Jesus! He is the Saviour. The king that comes from the bottomless pit is the destroyer. Every soul on earth that has reached the age of responsibility is directly under
{38}
the dominion of one of these kings. I would like you to lay hold of that. We are either subjects of the destroyer, and his real object is to drag our souls down into those immeasurable depths, or we are the subjects of the King who is the Son of the Highest, whose name is the Saviour. He is stretching out His mighty hand to deliver us from the power of darkness and to bring us into His kingdom, as the Son of God's love.
There is nothing between; either you are the subject of the destroyer and bound for the bottomless pit, or you are the subject of the Lord Jesus Christ and bound for heaven. The gospel comes to men because it is the power of God unto salvation
{39}
to every one that believes. It is the power that God uses to reach your soul, and lift you out of the dominion of the destroyer, and bring you into the kingdom of the Son of. God's love.
I would like to go back again to @Revelation 9. Out of the pit, it says, there came a smoke, and it darkened the sun and the air. That is, dear reader, spiritual influences come abroad upon the earth from the pit, with the result that the light from heaven is shut out. The light from heaven comes from the sun and the air. But the smoke from the pit, the darkening, the death-bringing influences of Satan are abroad on the earth, and out of that smoke come what are spoken of as locusts. In regard to vegetation
{40}
I suppose nothing is more destructive than locusts. They are used by the Spirit of God as representing the various influences *which Satan uses* to darken the minds of them that believe not, so that they should be destroyed. That is his object. He does not bear the name of destroyer in this world. He bears the name of an angel of light. He professes to bring light.
My reader, the smoke of the pit is permeating Christendom today. The minds of men are being darkened; the blessed light of heaven that has shone is being darkened by the smoke of the pit. And it says, "they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their tails." The end of their activities will
{41}
be to destroy men. Men are giving their ears and their minds to the smoke of the pit, the darkening influences of unbelief. I would warn those who are young that there are abroad in Christendom teachings, doctrines, that claim to be light, that profess to bring increased light to men, but are deceitful and destroying.
The locusts have faces like men. They profess to be marked by intelligence, but they are the instruments of the destroyer, they are dragging men's souls down to perdition. In listening to -- Spiritism, so-called Christian Science and other teachings which shut out the God and Christ of the scriptures, men are giving their hearts over to the darkening
{42}
influences of the pit, and the ruler of that pit is the destroyer. There is no other object before him but to destroy them.
I want to shew that the greatness of Jesus, the blessed Saviour, was such that He took men out of the dominion of Satan, and He held them in the kingdom of God, and that is what He is going to do with myriads of hearts today. The Lord said that when the strong man keeps his palace, his goods are in peace, but when a stronger than he comes, He binds the strong man and takes from him his weapons, the weapons in which he trusted. Satan was that strong man keeping his goods in peace, until a stronger than he came. The stronger than he was Jesus,
{43}
*another King*. I would like you to get hold of that -- another King, One Jesus.
I will illustrate the conflict between these two great powers on three or four occasions in the gospels. It speaks of the Lord Jesus being led into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil, shewing how real was the conflict between these two kings.
A man was found on one occasion of whom it is said, that he was full of leprosy. He was a man that, under the destructive influence of the destroyer, had been brought into the state that scripture sets forth as full of leprosy. He had been corrupted by that awful disease in every part of his body. His mind had become depraved -- his
{44}
lips had become corrupt; his ears were defiled.; his throat was an open sepulchre; his hands were unclean; his feet were leprous; his heart was corrupted. Leprosy is a figure of sin, and it says that this man was full of it. He was held by the destroyer by sin, one of his greatest weapons to hold man, to get him into his grasp and hold him, and drag him down to the pit -- this leper was in that condition. The Lord Jesus appeared within the view of that man, and with divine light in his soul he comes up in the wretchedness of his state, and he kneels down and says, "Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean." And the Lord Jesus stretched out His hand, that mighty hand,
{45}
and He touched the leper and said, "I will; be thou clean." "Where the word of a king is, there is power," says the scripture, and none can say, "What doest thou?" There was the King of heaven, His name Jesus, the Saviour, stretching out His hand of power to take that poor man out of the control of the destroyer and bring him into the kingdom of God.
Now do not let us look at that as only a beautiful picture. That is also what has happened to many hearts. I am bound to say that there are many of us who have felt something of what that leper felt, who have felt the reality of sin corrupting our minds, corrupting our lips, corrupting our hearts, corrupting
{46}
our hands, our feet, and in despair we have said, "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" That is the cry of a man in all the misery of sin corrupting every part of him. We found another King, One Jesus. We have found a Saviour who has taken us out of the dominion of sin and brought us under the rule of God and heaven.
I allude to another instance, a case of a woman whom the Lord Jesus met. It speaks of a certain woman who had a spirit of an infirmity eighteen years, and was bowed down so that she was wholly unable to lift herself up, and the Lord says of that woman, "whom Satan hath bound." You might say it is not nearly so
{47}
serious as the leper, just simply a woman that can only look down; all she can see is her home or her household, her dress, her earthly pleasures and her business, the source from which she gets her livelihood. That is all she sees; she is bowed together and looks down. That is where most of us were. Satan has bound her!
God made man *upright*. He made him with the intention that he should be able to *look up to heaven*. One of Satan's deceptions that come out of that smoke is that he binds men and women so that all they can see is the earth. Their whole lives consist in just looking down on the earth. The Lord says, "whom Satan hath bound." I believe
{48}
there are many like that. It does not mean what can be seen as corrupt. Many go on with their business, their homes, the pleasures of this life, and never once look up to God. The Lord says, Satan has bound her. The chains from the pit have laid hold of that woman, she is being dragged down by the destroyer. That is her position.
Now the King appears from heaven, from far above all heavens, His name, Jesus the Saviour, and looking upon that woman He said, "Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity." Immediately she became straight and glorified God. Immediately she had to do with God she became straight and praised God. She was translated out of the
{49}
power of Apollyon, the king of the bottomless pit, and brought into the kingdom of God by Jesus, the other King. Now, dear reader, the Lord has done that to many. I believe there are many who once lived like this woman, whose whole heart and time and life were spent in relation. to the earth, to money, to home, to the pleasures of this life, and never a thought about God; but the Saviour has come and broken those bonds, and has enabled us to stand and look up to God, and glorify Him. He is prepared to do that today, and He is doing it. May He do it f or you!
There are further instances, for we read later on in the Gospel of Luke that there was a blind
{50}
man sitting by the wayside near Jericho begging. Jericho was the city that was cursed, and He was outside it. He was near the place of the curse, and the Lord Jesus was moving towards that city. The god of this world has blinded the minds of the men of this world that believe not. The smoke is darkening the light of heaven, and there this man sat, a beggar in darkness and under the power of darkness, under the control of Apollyon the destroyer. And the One that came down from heaven comes. The Lord says, "I came down from heaven." The destroyer comes up to him from the bottomless pit; but the Lord says, "I came *down* from heaven." And coming down from heaven He
{51}
moves towards that blind man and he got light into his soul.
The King of heaven is near, One called Jesus, the Saviour. The blind man realises that the opportunity of his life had come, to be translated out of the authority of darkness into the kingdom of the Son of God's love. He cried out, "Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on me." He was not to be turned aside, the opportunity of his life had come.
My reader, this may be yours. The Lord Jesus is ready to take you out of the power of darkness and bring you into the kingdom of God. This man cried out so much the more, "Thou son of David have mercy on me"; then the Lord commanded him
{52}
to be called. And they came to Bartimaeus and said, "Rise; he calleth thee." And throwing aside his garments, he came to Jesus. And the King said, "What wilt thou that I shall do unto thee?" You see the King of heaven has everything to give. "*What* wilt thou?" There is no limit to what is in the hands of Jesus. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hands." So that the Lord says, "What wilt thou?" He replied, "Lord, that I may receive my sight." He wanted to come out of that dark region in which he lived, where no light from heaven ever reached his soul, into the light of the blessedness of God. And the Lord said, "Receive thy sight: thy
{53}
faith hath saved thee." It says also that he followed Jesus in the way, glorifying God. You see, he had been brought into touch with God. He followed Jesus in the way. He never moved another step under the influence of Satan, but held by the power of Jesus he followed Him in the way. This man, under the influence of the destroyer, was taken by the hand of Jesus and brought into the kingdom of God.
And so we pass on in our thoughts and come to Calvary. There is a scene of impenetrable darkness. The smoke is coming up out of the pit there, it is so dense that it is the darkest moment in the history of the world. The Lord said of it,
{54}
"This is your hour, and the *power of darkness*," and the darkness from beneath was coming up, darkness which found expression in hatred. Intense hatred was there at Calvary. The Lord says, "They hated me without a cause." A touching word is that. Can you name a cause why you are hating Jesus? Think, dear reader, of the venom, of the hatred, that caused them to spit upon His blessed face, and put a crown of thorns upon His blessed head, and when He said, "I thirst," they gave Him vinegar. This, and much more, was the darkness that had come up from beneath and found expression in human hearts against Jesus.
In that darkness there are two men, one on the right and
{55}
the other on the left. They have been the subjects of the king of darkness, of the destroyer, having done his will all their days, and just about to go down into the pit eternally. In that dark scene there shone rays of divine light and glory. The light of heaven shone out in all its brilliancy. No one can approach Calvary without feeling the darkness that is there, and in that scene there shone the brightest ray of heavenly glory, Jesus says, as He looks around, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." These words were the very light of heaven. The origin of such a prayer as that was in the heart of the high and lofty One that inhabits eternity. Nothing more lofty in the universe
{56}
has ever been expressed on earth. "Father, forgive them." There is nothing of the smoke of the pit about that prayer. It came from the heart of the high and lofty One. He dwells in the high and holy place.
The brilliancy of that light shone into the soul of one of the thieves who were crucified with Him, and he looks and sees another King, One Jesus. Up to that moment he had been held by the destroyer; and on the very brink of the pit his soul is directed to another King, One Jesus, the Saviour, and in the light that he has got from the prayer that came from the lips of Jesus, he turns to the Lord, and he says, "Lord, remember me when thou comest
{57}
in thy kingdom." The King is there and the kingdom is His. The thief is taken from the very brink of the bottomless pit and brought into the kingdom of God, and to the very paradise of God.
Just one other word, Jesus is not on earth now, as the scripture says, "The surpassing greatness of his power... which he wrought in Christ in raising him from among the dead, and set him down at his right hand in the heavenlies, above every principality and authority, and power and dominion." He is still another King, One called Jesus. He is still active through the whole scene, stretching out His hand to save.
I refer you to Saul of Tarsus,
{58}
too, a man who expresses the very character of the pit. In his hatred of Christ, in the insolence of his heart, he breathed out threatenings and slaughter. He travelled the road to Damascus, and as he drew near to that city there shone upon him a light above the brightness of the sun at midday. Hitherto in the hands of the destroyer, a tool and a slave of Satan, the light of heaven shone upon him and he heard a voice saying, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" If there is one unconverted man, woman or child reading this paper who has hitherto turned away from Jesus, let me ask you in His name, Why? Can you give heaven a reason why that blessed One should not be your Lord?
{59}
Can you give heaven a reason why you reject Him?
Jesus says from heaven, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" Saul says, "Who art thou. Lord?" and the answer comes, "I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest." The king of heaven bears that blessed name of Jesus. "I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest." And, my dear reader, as Saul fell to the ground, and accepted the authority of Christ, he passed out of the dominion of the destroyer, he passed out of the danger of the pit, and henceforth lived as a subject of Christ, as a subject of the Lord, the King of glory.
There are these two kings; one is active by subtle influences, and he is active everywhere to
{60}
destroy your soul; he is trying to get you into the pit. That is the truth of the revelation of God. Satan, I know, transformed into an angel of light, is nevertheless the destroyer, seeking to bring you down to where he is, The other King is the Son of the Highest that has come down to earth, and He bears that blessed name, Jesus, the Saviour. He stretches out His hand to take men out of the authority of darkness and bring them into the kingdom of the Son of God's love. Why not accept His authority over you? "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart that God has raised him from among the dead, thou shalt be saved." Salvation
{61}
is the transfer of the soul from the dominion of the devil and of this world into the kingdom of God where Christ is Lord. May the Lord grant to each one that he might see the mighty hand that touched the leper, that gave the blind man sight, stretched out to save. "I stretched out my hand and no man regarded." The Lord's hand is stretched out in salvation. It says, "no man regarded." May the Lord grant that we may not disregard that blessed hand that is stretched out for the salvation of men and for our deliverance from the destroyer.
{62}
LIVING WATER FOR SOUL THIRST
@Isaiah 55: 1-13
The Lord Jesus Christ, in speaking to an unsatisfied sinner, said, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water." This brought forth the reply, "Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw." This was a confession of soul thirst such as you would make if you were honest with yourself, and have never yet found Christ as your Saviour and Lord.
I would like to ask you, dear friend, Are you satisfied? Have you anything that really satisfies your heart? Many beginning their business history think to find satisfaction by diligent and earnest pursuit of that objective. Many pursue other objects, but only to learn, time after
{63}
time, the impossibility of finding lasting satisfaction here in this world. Disappointment and death touch all, and remove all, and then, alas! many are turned to a life of lawless abandonment, hoping to get from the corrupt stream of sin something for their hearts. Why not admit before Him with whom we have to do, that your heart is empty?
Well, in the scripture from @Isaiah 55, a message comes from God as an appeal: "Ho, everyone that thirsteth, come ye to the waters." He speaks in an appealing way. It is an invitation sent out to every thirsty heart among men, "Come ye to the waters." Come where the waters are, thirsty heart! Where are they? They are to be found in Jesus, the Rock of which Scripture speaks. It says, "They all drank of that spiritual rock, that followed them, and that rock was Christ." The source of the waters that alone can satisfy human hearts, is Jesus. Have you ever in your emptiness and thirstiness turned to Jesus? Maybe you have turned to novels, or to business, pleasures, or sport, but have you ever turned to Jesus? Have you ever asked of Him? The Lord Jesus said, "If thou knewest the gift of God... thou
{64}
wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee, living water."
The prophet goes on to say, "Come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." Wine is a figure, as we all know, of joy: come, buy joy -- not only water, but joy. Where will you find true joy? Scripture speaks of "everlasting joy." Have you ever tasted it? Have you ever known happiness which never ceases? You will find it in Jesus. Milk, the true food, which will sustain your soul, is obtainable from Jesus alone.
Then the prophet says, "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth not?" Why do this, says the prophet, and then he speaks of the "sure mercies of David," which refer to Christ.
I want to speak to you of Christ, through whom the living water, through whom the eternal joy, through whom the milk -- that pure mental milk of God's word, reaches your soul. God says, "I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people." God
{65}
has given that One in these three ways to men, as Witness, Leader, and Commander. I commend Him to you, and if you receive Him, you will find Him to be the source of the waters, the One who gives wine and milk, without money and without price. There are thousands upon thousands who could tell you they have found these things in Jesus, and they would not exchange them for any other thing. They have that which satisfies them, and though they desire more and more of it, they want nothing else for their souls than what Jesus gives.
Have you ever thought of Jesus as God's Witness? The reference is to Christ, the true David. This scripture tells us, "Behold I have given him for a witness." You understand what a witness is? The value of a witness depends on his witness being true. God hates false witnesses. One of the abominations in God's sight is a false witness, one who speaks lies, but God loves a faithful witness, and Jesus is "the faithful and true witness," the One who has come to earth to be God's Witness to men. Are you going to believe Him? Are you prepared to pass out of time into eternity, rejecting the witness
{66}
of God's Christ? God always has witnesses; He has never left Himself without them. The two great witnesses from God to all men today are Creation and Christ. What a witness creation is! God left not Himself without a witness, we read in @Acts 14, "in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness." What a witness creation is to God! The man who shuts his eyes to that witness is inexcusable. The man who ignores God, his Creator, is without excuse. God has put in the physical universe, in the sun and the moon and the stars, and in the cold and the heat, the rivers and the sea, and in all life which He has created, a witness to Himself. The man who lives his life in disregard of God, has turned his back on the divine witness, and is inexcusable. He can never say, I did not know there was a God, I did not understand; for while the sun shines, and the stars go on in their courses, and the rain falls, and the plants and the trees grow, God has kept before the eyes of every intelligent person a witness to Himself.
Then again, Jesus has come into this world as a Witness from God; declaring, not the power of
{67}
the Omnipotent Creator, but disclosing the heart of God towards men. Are you going to turn away from this Witness? Will you not open your heart to this testimony? What does this Witness say? Come to Bethlehem's manger and see *the* Babe. Heaven speaks of Him thus "ye shall find the Babe, wrapped in swaddling clothes, and lying in a manger," @Luke 2: 12.
That lowly Babe is a Witness, bearing testimony that God desires to draw near to men in such a way as to win their hearts. Is anything more calculated to break down fear, and dispel distance, than a babe? Who could fail to be disarmed of fear in the presence of a babe? Jesus came as a Babe; will you not listen to this faithful and true Witness? Listen to the witness as the leper draws nigh to Him! Jesus puts forth His hand and touches the leper, and says, "I will, be thou clean." The Witness is declaring, and His witness is always true, that God, in grace, would touch the vilest sinner and cleanse him. Listen as this Witness calls the blind man to Him; see Him lay His hand on his eyes! What does it mean? He is telling men that God would dispel the darkness that sin has brought into their minds,
{68}
darkness that the god of this world has brought in, so that they believe not. God has declared His desire that men should be brought out of darkness into His marvellous light. See the Witness at the grave of Lazarus; hear His voice, saying, "Take ye away the stone," and then "He cried with a loud voice, saying, Lazarus, come forth!" The Witness is declaring that God has power to break the power of death and corruption; death cannot stand in His way.
The Witness from God discloses that God is the God of the living, and death is to be abolished. Come to Calvary, and what words you will hear there from the Witness. I want you to think of Jesus there as God's Witness and to hear His testimony. Forgiveness is witnessed from the lips of Jesus. In the presence of unparalleled wickedness and malice, there fell from the lips of this divine, accredited Witness, these words, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." My friend, will you not listen to God's witness? I appeal to you, turn from the witness of men, turn from their thoughts, for they will perish. Listen to the accredited Witness of God, first, in creation, an unfailing witness to
{69}
the greatness of God and the littleness of men; and then, to the witness of Jesus disclosing in perfect testimony, the heart of God to men. God says by this prophet, Isaiah, "I have given him for a witness to the people." If you reject Christ, you reject God's witness, and virtually say that His witness is not true. To deny the testimony of an accredited witness in a human court is a serious matter, it is equivalent to saying that that witness is uttering perjury, but to deny the testimony of God's witness to Himself, is a terrible position to be in. I appeal to you to listen. You will find the source of the waters, and the wine, and the milk, as you listen to Jesus, God's witness, and open your heart to His testimony.
Well, the prophet says, "I have given him for... a leader." Are you following His lead? The world must have leadership. The basic idea of democracy, to bring all to one level, is both false and unworkable. This was never God's thought. He intends you to have leadership, and He has given one blessed Man to be the Leader, not indeed, in the present world, and its affairs as ordered by men, but He has exalted
{70}
Christ to His own right hand in heaven, as a Prince and a Saviour, "a leader to the people." He is the leader of our salvation; He will lead your soul into blessing. Everyone who accepts the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, is to follow Him. As souls listened to what Jesus had to say, when He was here on earth, they followed Him. That is the idea of leadership -- you follow your Leader. The Lord said to Peter, "Follow me; and I will make you fishers of men." Blind Bartimaeus followed Him in the way, glorifying God. Mary of Magdala followed Him right from Galilee to the cross. You must be led by someone; you are not capable of leading yourself; the human heart is too small; it must be led, either by Jesus, God's blessed Leader in the paths of righteousness, or else by Satan, the prince of this world. Christ is the Prince according to God; He is the "Prince of peace," the Leader in the paths of peace is Jesus. Let me ask you, Are you under His leadership? "He suffered, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God."
Then it says He is a "commander to the people." Some may be prepared to accept in
{71}
measure the Witness, and even the Leader, but are we all prepared to accept Him as a Commander? A Commander is one who has complete control; absolute control of those he commands. It is a military term. The reason why Christians sometimes do not find the water and the wine and the milk in such abundance as they would desire, is because they are not prepared to let Him *command* them. As soon as He commands the heart, the waters appear, the wine is available, and the milk also. Indeed, you reach a land which flows with milk and honey.
I would beg everyone to face this matter of command. Are we prepared for Christ as Commander? First, as Witness; then as Leader; and now as having complete control? Many learnt Him thus when He was here. Take the man who had the legion of demons; what leadership he was under! But the Lord took control; He commanded the unclean spirit to come out of him, and the man was set free. Then he desired to follow the Lord, he accepted the Lord's leadership, and the Lord says, Go to thy home, and show how great things God hath done for thee. And he went home, he did not dispute
{72}
the Lord's authority; he accepted the Lord as Commander. That is where many lack. They are perhaps ready for the Witness, but not for a Commander. The complete control of your life by Jesus will open the door to the fullest blessing from God. You cannot have a dual control. You will not get the water while you are under another control, while another is commanding your affections. Perhaps that is where you have come short, my friend? You are not prepared to come out into the open with Christ. Who is it who controls your heart? The Lord wants to know; He wants to be your Commander, and He asks you to tell it all out to Him, and to confess just what is keeping you away from the joy of knowing God. Christ is the One who alone has the right to your heart; every other object is false and is deceiving you. The Lord would bring this into the light. If you have not Christ as Object, another is holding your heart from Him. I am not speaking of natural affections, but of the spring of your being, of your soul. Christ has been given by God to control you, to command you, and as you receive Him, you will learn what that water is which
{73}
springs up to everlasting life; you will find the water and the milk and the wine in abundance. The prophet goes on to warn the people. He says, "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found; call ye upon him while he is near." I want that to re-echo in your heart. That is the time to seek Him -- this great Witness from God, before the anti-Christ appears, the false witness who
speaks lies, who leads men to perdition. Christ, the great Leader from God, is set for your blessing; He comes to you in God's name; but another leader is about to appear, he comes in his own name, he comes to lead you to perdition. There is coming into Christendom another witness, another leader, another commander, but he will lead men to destruction. So the word goes out, "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near." This is the time to call upon the Lord, for He may be found; He is not far away, He is near.
Then apart from the fact that the Lord is soon coming, there is the fact of the imminence of death. We know how near death is? After death, there is the judgment, and then there is a great gulf fixed, so that there is no intercourse
{74}
between the two realms, the realm of light and blessedness, and the realm of darkness and destruction. The Lord Jesus, the faithful and true witness, tells us this. So "let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him." You see, dear friend, you could not have access to this realm of blessedness, and take the living water which Christ gives, and go on with your own evil way. That is where the enemy would blind you; but the thing is morally impossible. "Let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his thoughts." That means repentance; you cannot reach this blessed One whom God has given to men as a Witness and a Leader and a Commander, and go on with your lawlessness. The word is "Let the wicked forsake his way." Who would like their past laid out in the light? What are you going to do with your past? The only thing to do is what the dying robber did -- he turned to Jesus. He looked back on his past; oh, what a history! And the only thing he could do was to turn to God's Witness and Leader and Commander, and he did this, for he said to Jesus,
{75}
"Lord"! He put himself in His hands; he judged his past, and God abundantly pardoned. Finally, we have this word from the prophet, "Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the briar shall come up the myrtle tree." If you follow the line I have indicated, what will appear in your life is that instead of briars and thorns, there will be the evidence of freshness and beauty according to God. The fir tree and the myrtle tree set forth what is green and beautiful to the eye: the briars and thorns are what came in through sin. In coming to Jesus, God's Witness, God's Leader, God's Commander there comes up the blessed evidence of life according to God, the fir tree, and the myrtle tree, and it is for a name, an everlasting name. God gets a glorious name by His work in the souls of men, and it is going to stand for ever.
I commend these three features of Christ to you, for as you accept Him, as God's Witness and Leader and Commander, you will find the great volume of living waters, and the sweetness of the wine, and the pure mental milk of the word available to you, but as I say again, the necessity
{76}
of repentance stands, "Let the wicked forsake his way." In the path of wickedness and unrighteousness there is no satisfaction, the heart is never satisfied; but the living waters are at the disposal of Christ, and if you ask Him, He will give you the living water. God speaks of the greatness of His thoughts, they are higher than the heavens above the earth; they are far beyond any thought ever conceived by the heart of man.
May the Lord encourage us all to come to Him increasingly, and may those who know Him not, "Seek the Lord while he may be found; and call upon him while he is near."
