{#THE SPIRIT OF REVERENCE}
{1}
THE SPIRIT OF REVERENCE
@Malachi 1: 12 - 14; @Ezekiel 1: 15 - 18, 22; @Genesis 28: 16 - 19
One has felt dear friends, that the atmosphere surrounding us in the world always calls for help from God, so that we should be preserved from it; for one of the greatest dangers we have to face lies in the moral conditions through which we pass.
It is evident from the Apostle’s word to Titus as to the Cretans, that unless they gained by the rebuke of the word, they would be sure to take character from what surrounded them. You remember that he said, “The Cretans are alway liars,” etc., that is what marked them -- “rebuke them sharply.” I do feel that we need to remember, that we are in intense danger of that which surrounds us.
The feature that is particularly on my mind is, the almost complete lack of reverence that marks men today. The spirit of reverence has largely gone from the world. You have only to walk down the street to see it; the titles of books and plays, and the language that is used by men, all betray the fact that the fear of God has gone from their souls,
{2}
and it is important for us to see that this presents a real danger; so that I believe God’s work shines out in its power, in maintaining us in the exact opposite to what marks the world. The work of God would have produced in His own in Crete, conditions opposite to those which marked the Cretans, so that instead of being always liars they would be marked by truth, always speaking truth; so that God’s work would shine out in contrast.
In this way one desires to speak and to encourage our hearts to be maintained and increased on the line of holy reverence for God, having in mind that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom -- the beginning of it (@Psalm 111: 10). There is no entrance at all into the path of wisdom, except as the fear of the Lord is maintained every day -- all the day. I think the Psalmist speaks of being in His fear every day -- all the day; not only when we set out, or in our family readings. The Psalmist desired to be in the fear of the Lord all the day. With the departure from the fear of God by men, wisdom is further away than ever it was. The awful folly and darkness that is spreading and sweeping through the earth, has its root in the absence of the fear of God, whereas the recovery and enjoyment of what is of God, the fountain of
{3}
life, lies in the maintenance every day of the fear of the Lord.
Now I would like to indicate in a few words that which calls for reverence from our hearts, and first of all it must be the name of God; the scriptures we have read indicate that. The absence of the fear of God and of the recognition of the greatness of God in their hearts, marked Israel in Malachi, while drawing near to Him with their lips. This led them to bring anything as an offering to God, who nevertheless was a great King. Scripture says “the King eternal.” One delights in this blessed title of God -- the King eternal. As we see thrones disappearing, the ruling powers shaken, there stands out above all, the King eternal -- the One whose throne is for ever and ever; and Israel, though outwardly recovered, were bringing the lame, the halt and the blind as offerings to the King eternal. Reverence of God had gone from their hearts.
I am sure this is a challenge to us -- it is to me -- as to what we are really offering to God. Have we maintained in our hearts the sense of the greatness of God and His eternal majesty, so that we bring the best? One would think of the beloved young brethren -- brothers and sisters and indeed the children. God is entitled to the best. His name is so great and glorious that we would not offer to Him
{4}
the fragments of our lives. Would we? Pursue our own ends and our own path, until our days are closing and then hope He may accept just the end of our lives. Surely such a King is entitled to the best, and the fear of His great name would lead us to offer the best.
He tells His people Israel through the prophet that His name is dreadful. That, of course, does not mean dreadful as we use it. It means that His name is to be reverenced, His name is a name that should be reverenced in every heart, and the sense of the greatness of His majesty should lead us always to recognise that the very best we have should be devoted to Him -- the best of our time -- the best of our affections -- the best of everything we possess on earth should certainly go to this great and glorious King. God resented greatly what Israel brought to Him. He said, “offer it now unto thy governor.” Would he accept it? They would not offer it to men. God said, “I am a great King  ... and my Name is dreadful.”
Then further the Lord Jesus Christ is to be reverenced -- is He not? We are brought very near to Him, we belong to that wonderful company that is His bride, and indeed it says His wife. The very nearest place to His heart that can be conceived. His wife has made herself ready. We are also in another
{5}
setting, His brethren. He said “My brethren”. What a place of nearness, but let us not overlook that, the Lord Jesus Christ is now, and ever will be, an object of holy reverence to our hearts. One feels that there is a danger of familiarity with the things of God, lest we should lose the sense of reverence, but He is to be reverenced -- He is worthy of it. The thought of reverence has been ruined in this world by those who claim the title. Those who claim to be reverenced have destroyed the reverence of men’s hearts. They, alas, are not at times even worthy of respect, whereas they claim that to which God is entitled, to which the Lord Jesus Christ is entitled. The blessed Lord Jesus is the One that every believer’s heart reverences, though He has come down so wonderfully near to us.
One loves to read the words of the great apostles, to see the sense of reverence of Him they had. You take the apostle Peter. I believe in scripture, the great address of reverence is, “Lord Jesus.” Lord Jesus is the approach of hearts that hold Him in reverential affection, who not simply love Him, but love with the love wherein is reverence, and I think “Lord Jesus” denotes that distinctly. The apostle Peter as he thinks of one that should replace Judas who never
{6}
reverenced the Lord, speaks of one who had been with them all the time “the Lord Jesus” went in and out among us; he is thinking in His heart of the presence of the Lord with them, as He came in and out, being so near them, being in His company and he speaks of Him as “the Lord Jesus.” All the time the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us. The great apostle Paul as he introduces the Lord’s supper, he not only brings with it the touch of those blessed affections that are in the hearts of His own, but he brings with it the reverence that is due and so he says, “The Lord Jesus the same night in which He was betrayed took bread.” The Lord Jesus. The Apostle, as he thinks of the introduction of the supper, has in his heart the reverence and affection that is due to that blessed One. Then the apostle John as he thinks of the moment when that blessed One is coming, when we shall see Him, and when He will come to have His rights, he says, “Even so, come, Lord Jesus.” As we think of the triumph of His coming, the Lord would maintain in our hearts that reverential love to which He is always entitled. If we think of Stephen about to leave this scene, about to depart and be with Christ, his last words are, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.” He goes out, with that expression
{7}
of reverential love for the blessed “Lord Jesus” whom he reverenced and loved.
The church as one, though so wonderfully near to His heart and eternally so, is in mind when the Apostle says, “and the wife see that she reverence her husband.” Why? because that is what is proper from the church towards Christ. The church will be maintained in nearness for ever, not only in holy affection for Christ, but in holy reverence for Him, for the man was not made for the woman but the woman for the man. It is well to see it. The man was not made for the woman but the woman for the man. That is to say, that the man is the greater, but the help-meet is suitable in every way, and the Lord will not abase her, He will recognise and delight in her, and love her, as Isaac loved Rebecca, finding in her just the features that his heart delighted in. Nevertheless the wife is to reverence her husband.
I had a thought to refer to another feature of reverence, which I believe we need, and that is the reverence of God’s government as set forth in the wheels in the book of Ezekiel. You remember that the prophet is looking at them, speaking of them, and he said their height was dreadful. Think of the rims of the wheels that he saw. “So high that they were dreadful and their rings were full of eyes,”
{8}
and the appearance was as a wheel within a wheel. As he stood and looked at them, they filled his heart and mind with reverence, with that dread, that is proper in relation to God’s government. He saw it again and he heard this word. “O wheel!” Just that ejaculation, “O wheel”, @Ezekiel 10: 13.
One desired to present from this a thought as to God’s unswerving government. These wheels go straight forward, and nothing can divert them. As they go round they see everything, for the rims are full of eyes, nothing whatever escapes and the height is so great, that as they turn they will take everything into account. They will touch everything in the whole universe. They may move slowly, for God is long-suffering, the God of endurance, but as they turn the height is so dreadful that nothing and no one escapes, from Satan to the most insignificant human being on earth. If Satan says “I will ascend,” as the wheels turn he will go into the bottomless pit, and if he aspires to have God’s place, then as the wheels turn he will go into the lake of fire.
Those wheels touch every nation. No nation escapes. You read this book further on and the book of Jeremiah and Isaiah -- God takes up Moab, Ammon, Egypt, Edom in His government, and He sees everything.
{9}
God says of Edom that when He dealt with his brother Jacob, He observed that Edom said, “Aha, Aha”. These wheels touch individuals too though God waits patiently. Think how He waited on Nebuchadnezzar -- yet though He waited, as the wheels turned that man was dealt with, indeed, Nebuchadnezzar says, that “those who walk in pride he is able to abase”. God says to Job, “Look on every one that is proud and bring him low.” Anyone in the world, in the companies of God’s people, in our homes, in business, every trace of pride, the eyes of these wheels see. God says, “Look on every one that is proud and bring him low.” No doubt in the government of God, the movements of these wheels account for the present position on the earth. The wheels and the eyes in the rims have seen the arrogance and the pride of men’s hearts, from the highest to the lowest, and the wheels are going round and touching everything. We need to realise it, that the height is dreadful.
If only king Saul had seen these wheels in his soul what a different history he would have had. One has been struck lately with the way they touched him. God brought the Philistine face to face with Saul, and instead of trusting God and dealing with him, Saul fled. He failed to take up the issue that God
{10}
brought to his door and deal with it, and the Philistine smote him at the end in accordance with the movements of the great wheels. Then David is playing the harp in the presence of Saul, and Saul took his weapon and threw it at David to slay him. He did not judge it and as the wheels go round Saul falls on a sword, according to those unerring movements. He gave David Michal for wife and secretly hoped to kill David behind the scenes. He did not judge it, and so the great wheel goes round and an arrow from the archers, from behind the scenes, pierces his armour and causes his end, according to the unalterable government of God.
I would just present that, dear friends, to our hearts and consciences. God’s government is such that if we do not judge an issue that He raises with us, it will destroy us. Do not think you will escape. The wheel is too high for any to escape, and the eyes are too many for God to miss anything. If He brings an issue to our door, individually, collectively -- judge it -- deal with it in the light of God, and He will support us; refuse to look it in the face, and face it out to its end, and there is nothing more certain than that it will result in our overthrow. The wheel is so high that it is dreadful, and we need to recognise that it is dreadful. It is to be
{11}
reverenced with all the reverence of our hearts, that God’s almighty wheel of government goes on, and what we will not judge, will come under His government sooner or later. Saul might have dealt with these things. David had to pass the same way, but he said, “against thee only have I sinned”, and though the wheel of government went on in regard of David, the movements of the wheel taught him to know God more than ever. It did not destroy him. He had used arrows behind the scenes in regard to Uriah, but he judged it. He came right out into the open. He says, “Search me and know me, and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting”.
So one desires very much, that with the reverence we have for God, and His great and dreadful name, and the reverence for the blessed person of the Lord Jesus, both from every heart individually, and from the whole church, that there should be reverence for God’s great and mighty wheels, so that as we look at them like Ezekiel did, we hear the word “O wheel”. Oh, that that expression might come into our hearts, and command us, “O wheel”. Paul was thinking of the wheel when he said, “Be not deceived, God is not mocked for whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap, for he that soweth
{12}
to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption, but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting”. So as the wheels go round, not only is that seen which has not been judged, so that it comes under the government of God, but everything is seen, the good as well as the evil is seen. One feels how often we think of the negative, but the positive is also seen by this wheel. David said, “I have been young and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken nor his seed begging bread,” I have not seen it. God’s government does not allow this, it takes account of what is according to God, and the governmental consequences of that are as certain as the governmental consequences of sowing to the flesh.
The last passage we read, is a most important passage because it is the first reference in scripture to the house of God. This is the place where Jacob comes, into living contact with God in heaven and where earth is in contact with heaven. There was a ladder which reached from the earth to heaven, God was at the top of the ladder and the angels of God were ascending and descending, and that spot where heaven and earth were in touch with each other Jacob describes as the house of God. He said, “how dreadful is this place”. That word dreadful does not
{13}
mean dreadful as we use it often. It means the same as reverence. How we should reverence this spot, how we should stand in awe of it. Then he says it is the gate of heaven, truly a wonderful place. It is the one spot on earth where heaven is in touch with the earth, where there are communications between earth and heaven, where there are messengers going up and coming down. It is the spot on earth where what God desires should come down from heaven reaches earth. It is the house of God -- a wonderful place. David knew something about it. “How amiable are thy tabernacles O Lord of hosts. My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord,” and he says, “A day in thy courts is better than a thousand, I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God than to dwell in the tents of wickedness”.
Why did David want to go there? Because of all that was in that house. There is a constant stream of praise in the house of God, everyone that dwells there is praising -- constantly praising, the only spot on earth where you will always hear praise. You go to the markets, you do not hear praise there, you go into politics, there is not much of it today, go into the mere religious world and there is the praise of men, but in the house of God everyone is always praising
{14}
God. No wonder David desired to live there. There is any amount of soul food, no restricted supply I can assure you in the house of God. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of Thy house. Think of what God can put on His table by means of His servants, the wealth of heaven is in the house of God. It is the house of prayer, the one place where nationalism does not enter. You pray in the house of God for all nations, because heaven does not stand in relation merely to England or Russia or Germany. When you think of heaven it stands in relation to the whole earth. There is not a separate heaven for England or Russia, there is the heaven and the earth and God is in the heavens and He sends down to the earth all that is in His mind to be enjoyed on earth, and He would have His house the house of prayer for all nations.
The first impression that Jacob had was that it is a place that should be reverenced. He said, “How dreadful is this place”. It should be reverenced in all our hearts. Why? Because the time is come, that judgment should begin at the house of God. Things are not left in the house of God. God often leaves things in the world for the present. Many an issue is not yet taken up with the world, though ultimately the wheel will take up everything;
{15}
but things are not left in the house of God, they are dealt with. The time has come that judgment begins at the house of God, therefore, we need always to have reverence, we need the spirit of reverence lest we bring into the house of God that which must be judged. Things are not allowed to be hidden you know; God may permit the thing to be hidden for a little while, giving space for repentance as indeed even to Jezebel, but in the house of God things come out. You see Ananias and Sapphira discovered that. They made an arrangement, they agreed together secretly to bring into the house of God a lie. Who is to know? Who is to know what this man and wife agreed to in secret? So they bring a lie into the house of God, but the time is come for judgment to begin there, and the lie cannot be hidden -- it cannot be hidden, because God is there, and His house is dreadful. I would urge all of us to seek help from the Lord to live transparently. If things come up that belong to darkness, face them and judge them. The apostle Paul had turned his back on them. He did not handle the word deceitfully, but commended himself to every man’s conscience in the sight of God.
A word on the passage I read in Ezekiel in regard to the terrible crystal. Over the
{16}
head of the living creature was the terrible crystal. It means, I believe, that every single thing that ever happens is reflected in the crystal. That is what happened in regard to Ananias and Sapphira, it had all been settled in the secret chamber, but they forgot about the terrible crystal, that up in heaven there was the vast expanse of terrible crystal, everything that had happened on earth was portrayed in this terrible crystal. You see that all through scripture. It started with Cain. He rose up and slew his brother. He slew him. Nobody saw him, but God says, “Where is Abel thy brother?” He said, “I know not, am I my brother’s keeper?” God says, “What hast thou done?” What he had done had all been reflected in the crystal. It cannot be hidden. Jezebel sends the message that Naboth is to be stoned as one who blasphemed God and she comes to Ahab and says “take possession”. It is all over, nobody knows, but God said to Elijah, “Arise go down to meet Ahab and speak unto him saying, ‘Thus saith the Lord ... In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood’ and ‘dogs shall eat Jezebel by the wall of Jizreel.’ “All had been seen in the crystal -- the terrible crystal.
So one desires for every one of us that we should have the sense of these things, that
{17}
there should be truth in the inward parts. We are shortly to enter into the holy city. That is absolutely transparent. Read the account of the holy city, there is not a dark element there. Every single feature of the holy city is transparent, not an element of darkness enters into it. The street is pure gold, like transparent glass, the river is as clear as crystal, its walls are like jasper, as crystal, the rays of its light are most precious, as crystal-like jasper stone. Everything in it is free of the dark elements of deception and what is hidden. It is composed of those who have lived on earth in the fear of the terrible crystal. The terrible crystal is above the living creatures.
The Lord would have it above us constantly in the reverence of our hearts. Also the reverence that is due to God, as God -- the King eternal, invisible, immortal, only wise God to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen. The reverence for the blessed Lord Jesus so that the language of our hearts might really be “Lord Jesus”, and as we come together as part of the assembly, we should see that as the wife is to reverence her husband, so we reverence Him, not only love Him but reverence Him. Then there is that wheel, whose height is dreadful, and the terrible crystal, and the house of God so blessed, but still so dreadful.
{18}
The Lord help us to be maintained in relation to these things, as the awful profanity of this world increases, where the Lord’s name is abused, where it becomes the song of the drunkard and is treated with such contempt; that there might be in our hearts the true spirit of reverence to the end.
{19}
GOD’S GLORIOUS END
@Luke 10: 38 - 42; @Luke 24: 50 - 53
One feels, dear friends, that we cannot too firmly lay hold of the divine principle that “better is the end of a thing than the beginning.” God would convey to our souls that there is a very wonderful time immediately ahead, and He would encourage us all to be in it -- whole-heartedly in it -- not to let anything stand in the way that would hinder our being in it. The thought runs through the Word of God -- take the heavens and the earth -- in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth -- but the new heavens and the new earth are better than the first heavens and the first earth, for they are going to pass away, they are going to disappear but the new heavens and the new earth will not disappear.
In the beginning the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden and there He put the man he had made. That Eden disappeared and nobody could find it -- men have tried but they cannot find it, but the paradise of God in Revelation does not disappear. God has a paradise that will not disappear, and
{20}
the blessed Man who is entrusted with the care of that paradise to dress and keep it for God will not disappear. The woman that God made at the beginning as a companion for the man and a help-meet disappeared, but we see in Revelation, the wife of the second Man will not disappear or deteriorate, she is as fresh in her affections and attire -- in the garments that she wears -- after a thousand years, as she was at the beginning. It is of God, wholly of God, to end with a brighter and more glorious character of things than He begins with.
With that in view I wanted to say a few words about the history of Bethany, to show how it began and how it ends and I think you will see that its end is better than its beginning. What one has in mind is that Bethany is a place, and it indicates what the Lord would have in a place -- what He would have in a village. This country has many villages as well as cities and towns. Bethany begins as a village and it indicates what the Lord would promote in a local setting. What a country this would be if every locality was characterised by the features of Bethany. Just think of Worcester as being really a Bethany, having the history of Bethany, beginning like Bethany and ending like Bethany; what a place it would be for the Lord! That
{21}
is what the Lord wants, and that is what He is doing. One would not hold these things out as impracticable for we see them coming to light in many places.
How did Bethany begin? I think the passage we read in the tenth chapter gives us the start of Bethany as scripture records it. The Lord was on a journey, the tenth chapter is very well known, “as He journeyed,” -- “a certain Samaritan” is there, one who is despised, one with whom the Jews have no dealings, the religious people had no dealings with the Samaritans. We know that is true today, the name of Jesus makes many feel awkward. You have only to mention it and an uncomfortable feeling arises, people look more intently into their newspapers and novels -- He is despised and rejected of men. A certain Samaritan as He was journeying, it was a wonderful journey, there never was a journey like that. He was taking with Him oil and wine, He carried with Him the means of healing and filling the heart of man with joy. He was prepared to make available His own beast for the man that was ruined, nevertheless He had not where to lay His head. The Lord said, “the foxes have holes” -- cunning, destructive creatures who did harm to everyone; they have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; almost worthless many
{22}
of them, “are not two sparrows sold for a farthing?” -- they have nests, but the Son of man had not where to lay His head -- Jesus the Son of man.
In this journey He had no home and nobody wanted Him, everybody despised Him and then Martha appears. It says He went into a certain village, it is not named at all, Martha had been meditating, she had seen something of the dignity and greatness of Christ the true Ark in these unsuitable conditions and it says she received Him into her house. She indicates by that act that whatever was the feeling in the world, she felt that the place that the Lord had was wholly unsuitable and so she opens her house. It is hers and she receives Him into it. The Lord goes into her house, she receives Him there, what wonderful grace on the part of the Lord to accept what was available! He goes into that house and He accepts it -- He accepts the affections of her heart expressed thus. She finds room for Jesus in her heart and in her house and that is the beginning of the whole history of Bethany, it all came out of that. The next thing, of course, is what always happens, and that is the moment we are in touch with Christ we become aware that we need a lot of adjustment. You see in the world you can do as you like in the religious systems,
{23}
you can control it as you like and think and teach what you like, but the moment you come in touch with Christ in a living way, then you need to be adjusted.
The Lord Jesus proceeds with the work of adjustment, Martha begins to find fault with the Lord, questioning whether He really cared for her, she says, “Dost thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone?” How wonderfully the Lord answers her, “Martha, Martha”, what a wonderful touch that is. You do not find in scripture there are many occasions where the person’s name is repeated; it seems to convey the deep interest of the Lord -- that is the object of it. The Lord says, “Martha, Martha.” The Lord loved Martha, she was a choice vessel to His heart and so He puts her right. He says, “thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is needful”. The Lord corrects her and she does not resent the correction, she does not answer back; the Lord loves women who can be corrected. It says, “Jesus loved Martha”, that means that she was lovable, for that is how John always presents love. What did He love in Martha? He loved a woman who received Him into her house and then was ready to be corrected. You will never get on and provide a Bethany anywhere, if you are not ready to be corrected.
{24}
If we think we know we do not like correction, but there will never be a Bethany on those lines. Show me a brother or a sister that is ready to be corrected of the Lord, even if it comes through the brethren or the ministry as it mostly does, and I will show you an element that will soon form part of Bethany.
The next feature that comes to light, is seen in Mary sitting at His feet listening to His word. She had seen one great thing, the greatest of all, that beyond all the service she could render to Him, the greatest thing was to know His mind, to listen to His word. I wonder if there is a Christian heart that has not reached that, who lives, as many do, in what they are doing. How much they are doing, that is their life, and they might even be seeking humbly to do it for the Lord. But the Lord says that “Mary hath chosen that good part”. To listen to His word, to allow Him to teach you, that is what is so lacking amongst Christians generally; they do not allow the Lord to teach them, they are converted and they set out to work; they are busily engaged doing something and they do not allow the Lord to teach them. But Mary is sitting at His feet and listening to His word.
The Lord loved Mary and Martha and then Lazarus appears afterwards. He is not mentioned here, but he is added to this community.
{25}
What marks Lazarus is that he is “our friend”; you must have friends to have a Bethany” -- our friend” not only the Lord’s friend. The Lord could say “our friend”; he not only loved the Lord but he loved the brethren, he loved them all. The Lord did not say, “Mine, and Peter’s and John’s”, but He says to them “*our* friend, Lazarus”. Jesus loved Lazarus -- “now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister and Lazarus.” That is how the thing began and how wonderfully it developed. The Lord found more joy in Bethany than in any other place on earth, He loved to go there.
Take that one day, it does not tell us when it was, but in the gospel of Mark we read that one day He went to Jerusalem and He went into the temple and looked round on everything, and what did He see? What sorrow must have filled His heart when He looked round on the temple of God and He saw merchandise in it. He saw that it had become a great business establishment where trade was going on. As He looked round what must have been His feelings. In that look He saw thieves there, not one or two but a den of them, usurping in the very house of God the place that belonged to God. It says He looked round on everything. Let us remember that when the Lord comes into a
{26}
place He looks round on everything; nothing escapes His notice, every single thing that goes on in that which professes to be the house of God is scrutinised by Christ, and He feels it. He felt it so much on one occasion that He made a whip of small cords and He drove out certain things from the temple as it is said -- “the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up” (or devours me).
In the gospel of Mark having looked round on everything He went out, and I believe He does that today, He has left it. You can see that abroad in Christendom, He has seen the den of thieves in it, He has seen the trading operations in the professing church. In the book of Ezekiel what comes to light is that there is an idol set up in the temple. What idolatry is going on! -- think of Rome what idolatry is going on in the temple! -- but it says He went out, and where did He go? With sorrow in His heart, as He saw what was in the temple, He went out and went to Bethany. Bethany would provide for His heart the true features of the house of God; the true features of the temple; the place where He could find what He looked for -- Bethany means the “house of figs”. It is where divine sweetness is ministered to Christ, where the sweetness of divine affections operating in the hearts of men and women become
{27}
available to the Lord. That is what the house of God should be, what the temple should be. It says the next day He came back again and He saw a fig tree and He looked for figs, what He had had in Bethany that evening -- it was eventide. He spent the night, the dark night of all that He found in the temple, in Bethany, and He had figs there. He came back and He saw a fig tree in Jerusalem and He looked for figs but did not find any, and He cursed the fig tree. That is what is going to happen almost immediately to that system that rejects Christ and usurps what belongs to Him; it is coming under a divine curse, and that shortly. The fact is, that the Lord found in Bethany what He did not find in the temple, for He left it and went to Bethany.
Then in @John 12 we read that “six days before the Passover” He came to Bethany. What the Passover must have meant to the Lord; He had six more days to be amongst men, to move about in this world to feel for six days what man is. How it was upon His spirit! And then comes the Passover. The apostle Paul tells us about it. He says, “Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us”. Think of the sacrifice of the Passover -- sacrifice means the cost, think of the cost to the Lord of the Passover with all the fire of divine judgment so soon to come upon Him! When the
{28}
Lamb has to be roast with fire, when the blood must be shed and put in a basin -- the Lord alone knew what that sacrifice meant in its fulness -- it was upon His spirit, and it says six days before the Passover He came to Bethany. What for? To have some figs, to have His heart refreshed with the sweetness of those affections which were in Bethany, such as would be eternally His through the sacrifice that He was going to make. He came to Bethany, what a spot it was! -- the gold was there, what affections permeated that town, for it was the town of Mary and her sister Martha! The gold of divine affections could be seen there, gold of Ophir. The silver is there, the Lord is owned and recognised -- the previous chapter brings that out. “Lord,” says Martha, “behold he whom thou lovest is sick,” and again, “Lord if thou hadst been here”; the Lord is recognised in that place. Six days before the Passover the Lord came to Bethany to find fruit for His own heart, the blessed fruit of love that the Passover would secure for Him -- what was known in Bethany was the greatness of that blessed One. It began to dawn on Martha, when she received Him into her house, and Mary when she listened to His word.
Now @John 11 unfolds more and more, the greatness and glory of the Son
{29}
of God; how He had come to Bethany, in order to unfold to their hearts the glory of God and His own glory, that is why He allowed Lazarus to die. He remained two days where He was deliberately, so that He might go down and manifest to them in Bethany the glory of God. What a spot Bethany was! The glory of the Son of God is known there. He was not known in Jerusalem; He was not known in that which was outwardly the temple, but He was known in Bethany. “This sickness,” says the Lord, “is not unto death but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified” -- and then they learn what they had never known before, the intensity of His love -- Jesus wept -- that was in Bethany. They knew in Bethany both the glory of His person and the intensity of His love. Even the Jews that were there said, “Behold how he loved him”. Then Martha appeared again, you remember, still needing some adjustment, still ready to accept it. The Lord said, “Take ye away the stone”. Martha intervened to correct the Lord again. She did not want what was there exposed, but we never have a Bethany unless we let the Lord expose what ought to be exposed. You see, if in this town there is secret corruption hidden away, you could not have a Bethany while that was there. You could not
{30}
have the blessed joy of @John 12 if the stone is not rolled away.
I would urge us to face what ought to be faced, if there is some moral element of corruption that ought to be faced, roll away the stone, the Lord can deal with it. It may be dreadful for the moment, but then the power of the Lord is manifest. In the twelfth chapter they make Him a supper. The nails that bind everything together are there -- *they* make Him a supper, not Mary, not Martha, not Lazarus alone but *they* do it. They are all in it now, bound together in one common desire to provide for Christ in Bethany and the Lord came *there*.
He came there six days before the Passover to feed upon the sweetness of those figs, the blessed sweetness of the affections in Martha that would serve and in Lazarus that would find his joy in sitting with Him. He was “one of them that sat at the table with him.” Lazarus could not have been happier as a true friend than just to sit with Him. It does not say he said anything, he just sat there with Him, and the Lord loved that. Mary took a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment. The Lord went there to get it from Martha and Lazarus and Mary, and He would not have that interfered with
{31}
under any circumstances. Judas was there, Judas crept in hiding the real thoughts of his heart, he says, “Why this waste?” But he did not really care for the poor, that sort of people never do; you hear people talking a lot about the poor, but they do not really care for them, they keep a bag. Judas had a bag, but the Lord comes in authoritatively. He says, “Let her alone” -- there is no option about it. He will come in if there is a Bethany anywhere and if anyone dares to spoil that, the Lord will rebuke it, He will give a word of authority.
In @Mark 14, two days before His death the chief priests and scribes and elders took counsel together as to how they might kill Him. It is not now the Passover aspect of the sacrifice of Christ, but it is the murderous spirit that hates Him in the world. It is within two days and they take counsel to kill Him; where will He go? As the murderous spirit of hatred rises where does Jesus go? “Being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper” -- that is where He was, only two days before His murder. With the very spirit of it in the atmosphere around He retires into Bethany to receive there the expression of the glorious dignity of His person from somebody’s heart. It says “a woman”, it does not name her, but He goes into that
{32}
house for His blessed head to be anointed, to receive the worshipful adoration of His glorious Person from somebody’s heart. He goes to Bethany.
That brings us to @Luke 24; the Lord is now out of death. He has sojourned for forty days with His disciples going in and out, we do not know everywhere He went, but scripture indicates that He went to many places. He appears here and there, and He can go where He will, you could not restrict a man out of death, He is not subject to any of the limitations which in grace He accepted in flesh and blood. He can go into the midst when the doors are shut, He can appear on the road to Emmaus and then vanish. He could appear to 500 brethren at once and disappear again. But now the forty days are over and it has come to the last day of His presence on earth. What will He do? Where will He go? He led them, everyone that loved Him, out of that murderous city, out from the place where the temple was that had become a den of thieves, as far as to Bethany. What a signal stamp of divine approval on Bethany, the last spot on earth that ever saw Him; the last place that He is found in. It indicates that He not only wants Mary and Martha and Lazarus there, but He wants all His own there, He led them. He wants
{33}
Peter there, He wants Mary Magdalene, He wants Mary the mother of Jesus there, He wants all His own at Bethany -- He led them there. That is what He is doing now, He is leading many a heart out of the religious systems of this world, out of the dark spirit of murder and hatred that is abroad in the world, out from mere formal religion so hateful to Christ, to a spot where He is ministered to. He led them out from everything and there He lifted up His hands and blessed them. That is where divine blessing is, in Bethany. He lifted up His priestly hands in blessing there. They know where He is gone, for He was parted from them and carried up into heaven from that spot.
What marks the professing systems of religion is that they do not know where Christ is. “As for this man Moses we know not what has become of him”; they have lost all touch with Him. But in Bethany they saw Him, they were all there and He is parted from them and carried up into heaven, they beholding Him. Each of their hearts filled, they return with great joy -- what a stamp of divine approval on Bethany that it should be the last spot. When going away for a long time, we always leave the spot we love most until the last. A man finally breaks with his home, he says “good-bye” in his office and among his
{34}
general friends and acquaintances, but he leaves his home until the last; it is the last act to say “good-bye” at home. That is what Bethany was to Jesus; it is the last spot that He leaves. The angel says “This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven shall so come in like manner.” He is coming soon and He wants the features of Bethany, He wants all the saints to correspond with Bethany when He comes to receive them.
May the Lord help us to begin by just opening out our hearts and our houses and giving a place to Christ in this world of His rejection. If we are prepared for correction, it will lead on until there is a spot where the Lord will find the very house of figs standing out in wonderful contrast to what He had in this world. They gave Him vinegar mingled with gall, the most bitter substance that human lips can taste, but over against that is Bethany, the house of figs. The Lord loved Bethany and He would like to see a Bethany in every locality where His own are. May it be so more definitely with us all.
{35}
THE PLEASURE OF GOD IN WHAT IS FILLED
@Acts 6: 1 - 15; @Acts 7: 1 - 4, 51 - 60
It is manifest in the scriptures, that God desires that every sphere that belongs to Him should be filled. God does not find pleasure in what is empty. At the beginning, at least the beginning as it stands related to man, it says “the earth was without form and void”, or waste and empty. What transpired we are not told, but God found no pleasure in an empty earth, so the Spirit of God began to operate, to fill the earth according to the mind of God. The dry land appeared, then God caused to grow out of the earth grass, the herb yielding seed and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, in order that the earth should be filled with life, not one tree here and one tree there, but God’s intention was to have the earth filled with life. The abundance of seed that is provided in the herb and the trees, showing that God intends things to multiply innumerably. Then God said that living creatures were to swarm in the seas, swarm, and fill the seas, so that the
{36}
Psalmist tells us that in the seas there are moving things innumerable. The multitude of life in the sea exceeds man’s power to even contemplate, the quantity, the abundance of the seas, and that is according to the mind of God, the living creatures were to swarm in the seas. Then God said that the fowl were to multiply in the earth and then He made man and said, “Be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth.”
God wanted the earth filled with men and women who in their spirits had contact with God, who had to do with God, “the God”, it says, “of the spirits of all flesh”, and He would fill the earth with men and women every one of them having to do with Him, every one of them according to the divine mind, able to walk with Him wherever He might appoint, every one of them to be like Him. You know what it says of Abraham “the friend of God”. God said, “I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore”. God would multiply the seed of a man who was His friend, like the stars and the sand of the sea shore.
Luke indicates that God’s house must be filled, where God lives, where God abides; He says “Go out ... and compel them to come in that my house may be filled”. God
{37}
will not have an empty house. It is a divine requirement that His house must be filled, so when the Spirit of God came He filled the house, the sound came from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled the house. No other sound in the house but the sound from heaven, not a word from the universities, not a word from the scientist, no, but the house filled with the sound from heaven, the mighty operations of the Spirit of God.
We are in a very dangerous position if we are empty. The Lord speaks of a house that was possessed but the demon had been put out and the house was swept, garnished and empty. The demon coming, and finding it thus, it says he takes to himself seven demons worse than himself and occupies the house. What a serious thing it is to have an empty house! That is what Christendom is becoming rapidly, an empty house. There has been a certain amount of cleansing and garnishing and outward deliverance from the demon but the house is empty. What place has Christ got in the eyes of the world? I ask all of us, any who may be in it, what place has He there? You know what the mind of God is about Christ, that He should fill all things in heaven and earth. He has gone far above all heavens that He might fill all things. If the house is empty that demon will come back
{38}
with seven demons worse than himself, and he is coming back, Spiritualism, Christian Science and all these satanic agencies, are coming back worse than ever to take possession of an empty house. So, as believers, we do not want to be empty.. It says “none shall appear before me empty”. God does not want one of His people coming up empty, not one. He does not want them to be lean and empty. It says “they shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house”. He wants the ears full, He does not want ears without grain, lean and empty.
So I wanted just to speak of Stephen, for he is a man that is full of the Holy Spirit, he is a great example of what marks a man that is full, so it says they were to look out seven men full of the Holy Spirit, full of it. Seven of them. I believe some of us sometimes think that being full of the Holy Spirit is something marvellous that nobody can understand, that it is quite out of the reach of ordinary persons. At the beginning it was not so, for when the apostles wanted someone to handle the money, the collections and to see that the widows were properly cared for and in no wise neglected, they said “look ye out among you seven men full of the Holy Ghost.” Does this mean that this was a most exceptional condition? What does it mean? It means that
{39}
they were men who judged the flesh. Men who could be trusted when they had the money, they would not steal it or misuse it. Unless a man is full of the Spirit you never can trust him, you never know what he will do. You can only trust a man who has the Spirit and is full. He judges the flesh in its various forms and he is not dominated by the earth.
Two great elements that hinder men and women being full of the Holy Spirit are, that the flesh is allowed secretly, or the earth has got into the wells. The water cannot spring up unless the earth is removed. “The princes digged the well, the nobles ... with their staves.” They got the earth out. How much we need that, do we not? The earth is there the things of this life. Now Stephen was neither governed by the flesh or the earth, there was room made for the Spirit of God. He was full of wisdom, full of faith, full of grace, full of power, these are the things that are seen in Stephen, the characteristics of a man who was full of the Holy Spirit. Now you can see clearly, in that man who is full of Holy Spirit, the normal features of the Spirit of God. First of all you can see in Stephen, that he is a man in touch with heaven, one who can look up into heaven; he knows what is going on up in heaven. It
{40}
says, “he saw the heavens opened”, he looked up into heaven and saw the glory of God and Jesus. That is what the Spirit is here for, to maintain in our hearts a link with heaven, those who gnashed on him with their teeth were the ones who had refused the Spirit, but Stephen had a link with heaven by the Spirit. Then you see how he corresponds with the mighty wind, he is in power, irresistible power, so that they could not resist the wisdom, the power, by which he spake; it was the power of the Holy Spirit that was irresistible in that man because he was full of the Holy Spirit.
Then the cloven tongue, how it is in evidence in Stephen, what words they were! He says, “Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken.” He goes over Abraham’s history with wonderful discrimination, then how, in process of time, Joseph appeared and how his brethren envied him and sold him into Egypt, and how when Moses, who was a prophet from God was raised up they said, “Who made thee a prince and a judge over us?” They refused Moses, and when he brought them out of Egypt they would not obey him and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt. Then Stephen goes on to David and Solomon and to Christ, and makes clear that they have always resisted the Holy
{41}
Spirit. What a tongue! Bringing it home in conviction to their consciences and hearts. Then the fire was there. Why could Stephen be trusted? His heart was naturally the same kind of heart as Adam’s and there was not much difference between Stephen’s heart naturally and the robbers¬ on the cross.
Adam is the beginning, and those robbers are the end, of man’s responsible history. What had happened that made Stephen to be trusted? What had happened that when men gnashed on him with their teeth, and ran upon him and stoned him, there was not a bit of malice in his heart. Not one trace of malice is evident in Stephen’s heart at the end of his life. The apostle Peter says “laying aside all malice.” He recognises that it is there naturally. It is there and we know it is, it is in every heart. We must not deceive ourselves, for as sinners, it is natural to bear malice and to be robbers. Yet there was no malice with Stephen. Why? Because the mighty power of the Spirit of God as fire was operating at the moment, the fire was there. Then every other feature of the Holy Spirit is there, the living water that the Lord speaks of in the gospel of John when He says, “If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink”, and “out of his belly shall flow
{42}
rivers of living water.” This He spake of the Spirit.
Think of Stephen at the end of his days, a perfectly satisfied man, a heart that never thirsts for ever. Why is he not thirsty? Because he has the living water in his heart, he has in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life. He got it from Jesus. At the end of his life he is full of the Holy Spirit, he looked up into heaven and saw the glory of God, and Jesus. He saw clearly, by the power of the Spirit, an object that satisfied his heart even at that moment, just as he is going out of the world. There was nothing wanting. He did not ask for anything except grace for his murderers. He saw the glory of God and Jesus. That is what the Spirit of God does, you know. The living water is the Spirit of God coming into the heart and filling it with a blessed Person, that is Jesus. “The water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.”
Stephen has the Spirit in correspondence with the sound from heaven, he has the Spirit as connected with the rushing mighty wind, the mighty movements on the part of the Spirit, he has it as a cloven tongue, enabling him to speak, he has the Spirit as the fire to enable him to judge the flesh in every form,
{43}
he has the Spirit in connection with the living water, to fill his heart and satisfy him for ever by bringing Jesus, the glory of God and Jesus, before the vision of his soul, he has the Spirit as the anointing, the oil that makes his face to shine.
Another characteristic of the Spirit of God is that it is the oil, the anointing oil that God puts upon His own, so that their faces shine with the dignity that is heavenly, that is what the anointing is, to put dignity upon man, dignity according to God. If God anoints, it is to dignify. It says “God anointed Jesus of Nazareth”, the despised One, living in a town that nobody ever expected anything good to come out of. “Despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief and we hid, as it were, our faces from him: he was despised and we esteemed him not.” But God anointed Him with the Holy Spirit and with power. What a dignity! God’s Anointed. God puts upon men a dignity that belongs to heaven. The dignity of the world God hates. But God loves people who are dignified by the anointing. So Stephen is dignified and he stands before his accusers and his face shone as the face of an angel. What made it shine? He was full of the Holy Spirit, he was not allowing the flesh, and without attempting anything
{44}
at all, without trying to shine, his face simply shone and like an angel’s with the dignity of heaven.
Stephen is a man in the liberty, the devotedness, the intelligence, and character of one who has the breath of Christ. So that you look at him and he reminds you of the Lord, without trying to be anything on the line of effort. He is the very expression of love and of the character of Christ. Able to look up into heaven, just like the Lord as it says in @John 17, “Jesus lifted up his eyes to heaven,” -- not a cloud between heaven and Jesus -- His blessed eyes could look right up into heaven and he said, “Father, the hour is come”. Stephen could look up into heaven, no cloud between. Jesus, here as a dependent Man prays. Stephen like Him, kneels down and prays. He is not trying to do it, he is doing it because he has in his soul the breath of Christ. The Lord makes clear the result of having His breath. He says, “Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them”. The Lord’s whole life was on the line of remitting, remitting everything that was personal to Himself. When He breathed on His disciples He said “Whose soever sins ye remit”. You could not remit without that breath, it is not natural for us to forgive, we may let the things go, but the grievance is
{45}
still in the heart, it will crop up when we are not watching. How often we see the things that were supposed settled five, ten, twenty years ago, are not really settled because they are not remitted, because the gain of the breathing of the Holy Spirit is not practically effective in our souls. So Stephen as he prays says, “Lord, lay not this sin to their charge”. He says as far as I am concerned it is remitted”, and this whilst they were gnashing on him with their teeth, having dragged him out of the city and stoning him. Stephen is full of the Holy Spirit. Now don’t let us think that is exceptional. In one sense it is, but God does not intend that it is to be exceptional. These cases in scripture are set forth as patterns of what is in the mind of God. Stephen was not even an apostle, he was a deacon, he was just a man who attended to the material side of the welfare of the saints in the first instance, but he made room in his soul for the Spirit of God by self-judgment, he did not allow the flesh. When it came to his home, or his business or his family, and the things of this life, he did not let it fill the wells.
What happens so often is that we let the things of this life fill the wells, the earth is there. Stephen did not allow that, but the Spirit of God took complete possession of him.
{46}
I believe that is how the present dispensation is going to end. When the Spirit came at Pentecost it says it filled them all. The previous dispensation ended like that. Zacharias when John was born was full of the Holy Spirit. So that is the feature that will be at the end. Of the aged Simeon, it says, it was revealed to him by the Holy Spirit. The Spirit of God had brought a sound from heaven to Simeon’s heart that he should not taste death until he had seen the Lord’s Christ. Then it says, “he came in the Spirit into the temple”. That is the way to come into the temple. As judging the flesh he came in the Spirit into the temple and he saw Jesus and recognised Him. When he saw that little Babe he knew at once who He was, and took Him up in his arms and said, “Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace ... for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all people. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel”. Why don’t people see? Because they are allowing the flesh, and they are not coming into the temple in the Spirit, people who come in the Spirit come in subject. They come to learn, to enquire of God, people who enquire are instructed. So Simeon sees this little Babe and takes Him in his arms, recognising Him. Anna seeing Him gives
{47}
thanks. Think of the Spirit in that dear woman, full of wisdom spiritually, she gives thanks and speaks of Him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. How did she know? She did not walk in self-will, but in subjection, that is how she knew. If we judge ourselves the whole thing becomes as clear as noon-day. “He that is spiritual discerneth all things.”
May the Lord encourage us to see what is available to us, and help us to recognise and make room for the Spirit of God, for His name’s sake.
{48}
THE INHERITANCE
@Psalm 47: 1 - 4
I desire to speak a little of the inheritance which God desires us to occupy and enjoy, which it says in this scripture, He has chosen. “He shall choose our inheritance for us.” The One who is the King of all the earth, that is to say, who is supreme in all the earth, who can choose any part of it He likes -- “He shall choose our inheritance for us.” There is something that He has chosen particularly as the inheritance that He desires us to occupy, and that inheritance in this psalm is “the excellency of Jacob whom he loved.” He wants us to inherit that. It is a thought that is worthy of consideration -- the excellency of Jacob; there is nothing better than what is excellent. We have all learned that excellency is superlative, and scripture speaks of the excellency of Jacob whom He loved. God wants us to inherit that as our portion.
I understand Jacob to refer to the work of the Spirit of God. Abraham brings before us the Father -- the source from whence all has come. Isaac refers to Christ as the Son in
{49}
resurrection, the heavenly Man to whom everything belongs; but Jacob, as I understand it, refers to the work of the Spirit of God in us -- poor feeble worms. God says, “Fear not thou worm, Jacob.” He is going to take up Jacob and make him excellent. God loved Jacob -- “Jacob whom he loved” -- “the excellency of Jacob.” That love is not the love of compassion, it is not the kindness and love to man of our Saviour God, it is the love of complacency that found in Jacob the very features that delighted the heart of God. They came out in a man who was in himself a worm of the earth -- that is the inheritance. God wants us to inherit the work of the Spirit in our hearts, to be in our inheritance so that God can love us. It says, “Jacob have I loved,” not Israel, God loved Israel too, but *Jacob* have I loved and Esau have I hated.
One desires with the Lord’s help, to indicate what it was that God loved in Jacob, at least in some little way. “Jacob have I loved” -- we are in the habit of thinking of Jacob as a crooked man in whom there is very little that God could love. Men of the world reading the history would say that the best man of the two was Esau, but God hated Esau. There is no unrighteousness with God, and the work of the Spirit is to deliver us from what God hates, and to attach us to what God loves, so that
{50}
*we* love it and are marked by it. It becomes our inheritance which He has chosen for us to take possession of -- what was lovable in Jacob -- as being our inheritance.
I would like to just touch on that. The first feature in Jacob that God took account of, was that even before his birth there was a struggle. There was an instinctive struggle as to who was going to get the upper hand, that came out at the outset, and God loves to see that struggle. It is the first lovable feature in the soul when there is a struggle. God loves to look down on men and women and see a struggle going on in their souls, as to who is going to get control. Rebecca did not understand it and she enquired of God, and God told her what it meant, that there were two kinds of men and one was going to get the upper hand. That is the first feature that the Spirit of God speaks about.
I am sure there are some here in whom the struggle is going on. Do not be discouraged, God loves to see it. You see in the world there is no struggle, a man of the world does not struggle, the flesh and Satan dominate him, he is so absolutely controlled that there is no struggle, but as soon as there is anything of God in the soul, there is a struggle. When Jacob and Esau were born, the Spirit of God said that Jacob took Esau by the heel. Jacob
{51}
instinctively had the sense that that man must be displaced -- God loved Jacob for that. That instinct is in every Christian here. I do not think we belong to the people of God unless the instinct is there, that the first man has to go. When the gospel is received into the heart God conveys that to that heart. When light is received from God there is a sense that Christ must be supreme, the second Man must be first and the first man must give place. The instinct is there with us all and God loves to see it.
Then, as Jacob grew up, you find other features coming out that God loved. It says when the boys grew that Jacob was a plain man, that is a homely, simple man, dwelling in tents -- God loved him for that. God loves the homely men dwelling in tents, there is no pretension about a tent. He was a simple kind of man who lived in tents -- sojourned with Abraham and Isaac in tents. He had a family, with all the limitations and restrictions that a family brings a man. A family brings limitations, a man with a family cannot do what he likes, he has restrictions, but he has a sphere for his affections, he has a wife and children, he cannot go here, there and everywhere, and so he lives simply. Jacob lived simply apart from the pretension of the world that was around him. It says he was a homely
{52}
man and he dwelt in tents. The Spirit of God mentions that as being a feature that God loved in Jacob.
Jacob was also marked by this, that he put a great price on the blessing of God. I know that he went the wrong way to get it, but the secret of many of his actions was, that he wanted above everything else on earth, to have God’s blessing, and God loved him for that. If there is a brother or sister that puts the blessing of God before everything, they are inheriting the excellency of Jacob. That is more than their education, more than the prosperity of their business, more than the comfort of their homes, more than anything, more than life -- the blessing of God. That is what Jacob wanted and God loved Jacob, He would convey to Jacob the sense of His love, His deep interest in him, even, when for the moment he is suffering for his mistakes. He had left his father’s house and was in the desert on a journey. He took a stone for a pillow and lay down in the place and God conveyed to Jacob there how deeply interested He was in him. Jacob dreamed that he saw from where he lay a ladder which reached right up to heaven, and God was at the top of the ladder. God conveyed to Jacob how deeply interested He was in him, and that He would be with him, in every place where he went. God has a
{53}
great interest in every soul that wants His blessing, however bitter and hard may be the circumstances, with a stone for a pillow it may be, but God used even that occasion to convey to Jacob’s heart how deeply He was interested in him.
Then you find more lovable features coming out, though indeed some unlovely ones are seen in Laban’s house. When Joseph was born Jacob said, “Let me go”, he was prepared to leave Laban’s house and all that he had lived in, when he saw Joseph, and God loved Jacob for that. He got a fresh glimpse of Christ typically, he loved the one who was a wondrous figure of Christ, and the sight of him made him desire to leave everything -- God loved Jacob for that. That is what the Lord loves to see. He brings Himself before our hearts, why? So that we should pack up and leave the things we have lived in. Naturally we live in the things of this life. Jacob said that, “If God will give me bread to eat and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my father’s house in peace; then shall the Lord be my God.” But when he sees Joseph he is prepared to leave all the things of this life, and to set out in faith. Dear Christian friend, perhaps that is what God has to say to you, He would give you such an impression of Christ, that you would in spirit leave all that has bound you, may
{54}
be father, mother, husband, wife, brethren, business or religious associations; but when you get a glimpse of Christ you will say like Jacob, “Let me go”. He was prepared to move under the influence of what he saw in Joseph, and as he moved you find other features in which God finds great joy.
The one I want to speak of particularly is when Jacob went to meet Esau. He sent over the brook, his flocks, his herds, his menservants, his maidservants, his wives and his children, and he was left alone with God. That was a deliberate act on Jacob’s part; he sent over the brook everything he had on earth and he remained alone all night with God and God loved him for it. God loves those who seek personal intercourse with Him, those who are prepared to withdraw in spirit from all that they have and all the activities of this life, to have to do with God. What came out of that? A Man wrestled all night with him, and Jacob clung to Him and said, “I will not let thee go except thou bless me.” Just as he began, so now, he wants the blessing, but now he does not want it as stealing it from Esau, he wants it direct from God. He says, “ I will not let thee go except thou bless me.” What a thing for the heart of God, to come from this poor worm of a man, the man who says, “I will not leave you unless you
{55}
bless me, I want your blessing”. “The blessing of the Lord it maketh rich and he addeth no sorrow with it.” Jacob was blessed, his name was changed, and he learned there to be dependent upon God -- and God loved Jacob. Jacob moved from that spot halting on his thigh, a dependent man, but a man that God loved.
How happy it is, if that lovable feature is inherited by us, that we find opportunities to have to do with God alone. One fears that we do not know much about it, to let wives and children, flocks and herds go over the brook and have to do with God in the secret of our souls alone. It is part of the inheritance of the excellency of Jacob whom God loved, to have to do with God in secret alone. God loves such.
Then you find several other features. God passed Jacob through much discipline, and he reached these things through discipline, but there came a point, when he was prepared as an old man to make another move. It is a tremendous test to old men to move, it is a bitter test much more so to old men than to young ones. Jacob had been living in Canaan for many years and he never expected to move, he thought the position was settled for the rest of his life. That is what some of us think about certain features of the truth, we thought we had seen certain things and there would never
{56}
be a change. Jacob was an old man, his family had grown up around him, but the day came when there came wagons and food and substance, which brought to Jacob’s heart, that he could even yet get a fresh glimpse of the greatness and glory of Joseph, a view that he had never had before. His heart failed within him as he thought of it, for he never expected to have another view of Joseph, he thought he had seen all of Joseph that there was to see; but the substance came in such abundance from Joseph, that it convinced Jacob that he might yet see Joseph, and old as he was he set out. He said, “It is enough, Joseph my son is yet alive, I will go and see him before I die.” He would have one more view of that blessed one, greater than any he had before.
The Lord loved to see Jacob move, He loved to see that old man leave his home and all, to set his eyes on Joseph. What a joy! What a lovable man, that would leave old-age comforts to get a glimpse of Christ in a new setting, in a new way beyond anything he had ever seen before. The Lord is doing that now, there is an apprehension of Christ available to His own now, greater than we have had before in our lives. One would entreat the old ones affectionately, to be prepared to move with the wagons and substance that Joseph has sent to induce us to come. The testimony to the
{57}
greatness of Christ is confirmed with true substance from Himself. It is brought by those whom He uses to induce our hearts to move.
Then you see Jacob goes down into Egypt and you see him at the end of his life a most lovable man -- a man that God loves. It says, “by faith Jacob when he was a-dying”, what an end! You see him beginning with a struggle and the grasping of Esau’s heel, but what an end! God’s purpose for us is always to have a better end than the beginning. It says, “By faith Jacob when he was a-dying”. What does he do? He blesses both the sons of Joseph. The Spirit of God selects that as the great act of faith, the great expression of the light that is burning in his heart, for that is what faith is -- light in the soul. That light is shining so brightly in Jacob when he is dying, that he blesses the sons of Joseph, and how does he bless them? He puts his right hand, the hand of power, on the head of the younger, on Ephraim’s. He is blind, he has not natural sight at all, and Joseph thinks Jacob did not see and it displeased him. He says, “Not so my father for this is the firstborn”, referring to Manasseh, but Jacob said, “I know it, my son.” He had passed through a life of discipline and he knew it. He guided his hands wittingly, it was a deliberate act, no accident.
{58}
How did he know? He knew it through discipline, he knew it through the experiences he had learned -- the worthlessness and untrustworthiness of the first man. The place of blessing and power with God and trustworthiness was in relation to the second Man.
“I know it,” what a lesson it is to really know it. We all, every Christian knows it, as light and instinctively, but Jacob knew it experimentally by the Spirit’s work in his soul. Jacob had had a firstborn and had great joy, as we all have had, in our firstborn -- excellency and dignity. Reuben was his firstborn and excellency is connected with his firstborn, every hope of his heart was once centred in Reuben, but he came in bitter heart-breaking experience to the truth that he could not trust him -- unstable as water. Reuben could not be trusted with the most precious things -- what a lesson for Jacob’s heart, untrustworthiness in Reuben! That is what our hearts are naturally and we have to learn it; we cannot trust the natural heart with the most precious things on earth -- “he that trusts his own heart is a fool.” That is not only to be light but something we know subjectively.
Then we get Joseph, the birthright was Joseph’s, not because he was the firstborn historically but by moral right. He was one of the youngest but he takes Reuben’s place
{59}
because of moral right to have it. The birthright was Joseph’s and Jacob learns that he could trust Joseph everywhere, he could trust him in his father’s house, he could trust him everywhere. Jacob had a sense of that when he made him that coat of many colours, for he knew that Joseph could be adorned with many colours, he was fit to have any colour. He could trust Joseph in the field; some of us have to be very humble about our movements in the field. What are we doing in the field -- in the world? Joseph went into the field, and all he went there for was to seek his brethren, he could be trusted to seek them. Some found him and said “Whom seekest thou?” He said, “I seek my brethren”, that is all. He could be trusted in Potiphar’s house. Potiphar found it out as well, and he put the whole house under the care of Joseph, everything in Potiphar’s house could be handed over to Joseph. He could be trusted in the prison; for the keeper of the prison put the prisoners in the hands of Joseph -- the prisoners were safe in Joseph’s keeping. He could be trusted on the throne of Pharaoh -- “only in the throne will I be greater than thou.” He could trust him even to that, “according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled.” Jacob knew all that when he blessed the two sons of Joseph, he understood that the second
{60}
man was the trustworthy man, so he guided his hands wittingly, and he crossed them and blessed Ephraim and Manasseh. He knowingly and deliberately recognised the second Man as being the one who is pre-eminent.
Then it says, “he worshipped”, by faith he blessed the two sons of Joseph and worshipped. God loves worshippers. Worship is the result of a sense in the heart of what God is. The elders fall down and worship, they worship with the sense in their hearts of the greatness of God, they fall down and worship. Not because of what they are through experience, but because God is so great. Jacob worshipped, he had learned through a long life what God was. He had been through some bitter experiences, but he had learned God. The very moment when his head was on a pillow of stone he learned about God and God’s house. He learned it when Rachel died, a terrible thing to his heart that he never forgot to the end of his days. Yet on that occasion he received Benjamin, the son of his right hand. He changed his name from “Ben-oni”, son of my sorrow, to “Benjamin”, son of my right hand -- power comes out of sorrow -- such is God.
He learned, too, that the things that seemed against him were often God’s greatest servants to bless him. He said “Joseph is not, and
{61}
Simeon is not, and you will take Benjamin away: all these things are against me”, but he learned afterwards what God was. These very things were, in the hand of God, the means of profound blessing to the whole earth, as well as to Jacob. So he worshipped, leaning on the top of his staff, he has learned to be a dependent man and God loved him.
When Jesus prayed at His baptism, it says the heavens were opened and a voice said “Thou art my beloved Son”, @Luke 3: 22. God expresses His pleasure and delight in that praying Man. Then again, on the mount it says, “as he prayed the fashion of his countenance was altered”, and there came a voice, “This is my beloved Son, hear him”. God does not tell us what He is going to say, but He says “Hear him”. May the Lord thus keep us to inherit the excellence of Jacob.
{62}
INCORRUPTIBILITY
@2 Timothy 1: 8 - 10
“Who has annulled death and brought to light life and incorruptibility by the glad tidings.”
I wish to call attention to the greatness of what is brought to light as incorruptible. Two great things, life and incorruptibility have come to light -- they are not hidden, mysterious, unknown and unknowable, but they have been brought to light. I do not know anything that should fill our hearts with such joy as this, that what is incorruptible is within reach. It does not only mean that the thing has not been corrupted. Take a little babe, one of the most charming sights on earth, the very centre of its parents¬ affections -- it has not been consciously corrupted, but it is not incorruptible. However simple at the moment, we know very well that a little child is corruptible, and ere long it will become manifest. The incorruptible things are those which not only have not been, but cannot be corrupted.
There can be no question at all that we are in the last days of the world’s history as we know it -- the last days, which are perilous times.
{63}
The last days of every dispensation are marked by awful corruption. Take the end of the world that God overthrew in the flood. As God looked down upon mankind, He said all flesh had corrupted its way before Him, and “the end of all flesh is come before me”, but He took Noah and his family out of the corruption. So with the end of Sodom and Gomorrah. Those cities of the plain were so corrupt that God turned them into ashes and delivered Lot, that righteous man who vexed his righteous soul with the abandoned conversation of the wicked. When God broke the power of Egypt the land was corrupt, the pools and ponds were corrupt, the land stank with dead frogs, and out of the soil came the lice. The whole scene was corrupt, and God broke its power in judgment and took His people out. So with the seven nations; when their end came, it was a scene of unspeakable wickedness and lawlessness, throwing their children to the fire, soothsaying and enchantments, and God came in in judgment.
So in the end of king Saul’s history; the lawlessness of the kingdom increased until he turned aside to spiritism -- he sought for a woman who had the spirit of Python, and he died that day under the judgment of God. And so in every stage of the history of this world, especially the religious world. Babylon
{64}
the great is fallen, and is become the hold of every unclean and foul bird, the mother of harlots and abominations, and God says to His people, “Come out of her, my people”, because He is going to pour the wine of the fury, and the wrath, of God Almighty upon that awful system. The last days are marked by men of corrupt minds turning away from the truth, and teaching that gain is godliness. Peter speaks of those who arise at the end of the days who promise liberty -- hold out all kinds of inducements, and they themselves are the slaves of corruption. Their lives will not stand investigation. I mention this because of the danger to those of us who are young, lest these influences should have a place with us.
One felt the Lord might help us in looking a little at the thoughts of God as to what is incorruptible; because the only way of being preserved from evil is to have the positive enjoyment of good. Only as we are in touch with what is incorruptible shall we be preserved from the corruptions that abound. First of all I want to refer to the incorruptible God (@Romans 1: 23.) God is incorruptible. We can never have to do with God except on that platform; He will never lower the standard. He dwells in the high and holy place, and He is holy, and before His throne the four living
{65}
creatures full of eyes cease not to say day and night, “Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.” We can only have to do with God on the ground of our judging what is corrupt. “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God”, and “Without holiness no man shall see the Lord”. Grace does not lower that, nor set it aside; it is a continuous principle that abides.
There has also come into the light of revelation, a blessed Man who is incorruptible, the Lord Jesus Christ. It was said of Him, that it was not possible He should see corruption. Think of a blessed Man here on earth for God’s will whom it was impossible should be corrupted. That is what the shittim wood of the ark represents, Christ as Man. Shittim wood was the most durable wood known in those days. The Lord Jesus Christ came into this world as “that holy thing” -- not innocent, but holy -- and what was proved in His sojourn here was that He could not be corrupted. The temptations make it clear that no principle of evil, however subtle, could find any entrance whatever. The great corrupter, that being who had corrupted his wisdom at the outset by reason of his brightness, brought all his corrupting influences to bear upon Christ, but what came out was the shittim wood -- a perfectly incorruptible Man. He attacked the
{66}
Lord again and again -- through Peter, through the weight of sorrow in Gethsemane, with all the dark forces of his power at the cross -- “Your hour”, says the Lord, “and the power of darkness” -- but He shines out incorruptible and goes down into death as incorruptible. So it says of Him, “thou wilt not suffer thine holy one to see corruption”. When His precious body was laid in the grave it was divinely impossible that that vessel should ever know the touch of corruption.
It is certain, we shall only know what incorruptibility is, and have contact with it, as we have to do with Christ. The source of incorruptibility is God, the expression of incorruptibility is Christ in manhood. That sweeps away practically the whole of the modern teaching of this world.
Now I want to call attention to the precious blood of Christ. I do not know anything that ought to touch our hearts like that. The apostle Peter speaks of that precious blood, implying that it was incorruptible -- “not redeemed with corruptible things, such as silver and gold”. Silver and gold have a certain intrinsic value, and a certain value amongst men, but they are not incorruptible. On the one hand it cankers, it has an element in it that will eventually destroy itself. It may take many hundreds or thousands of years, but
{67}
gold can waste away. Not only so, but its value might disappear. Silver, particularly, is of practically no value today, and you can understand a position might easily arise when gold would have no value. If supplies of food were cut off, gold would be of no value, for nobody would give up food for gold in such circumstances.
The apostle contrasts that with the precious blood of Christ. It is intrinsically incorruptible, and it has a value that never deteriorates. It is the price of redemption. The blood refers to the life of Christ here; He took a certain condition in which the life was in the blood. We have all forfeited that condition of life, and will lose it every one, either by dying or by the Lord changing us. But the Lord Jesus never forfeited His title to live. He had a perfect right to live in flesh and blood for ever, for His life as a Man in flesh was incorruptible, but He gives it up as the price of redemption. “The redemption of the soul is precious” -- it is costly, and must be given up for ever. So when the Lord laid down that precious life He gave it up for ever, as the price of redemption. What an attraction for our hearts! That is what awakens the song of the redeemed “Worthy the Lamb that was slain”, “for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed to God by thy blood”. Gold and silver may deteriorate, but
{68}
the value of that redemption remains to all eternity. It will never deteriorate.
There are other things that come to light as incorruptible. The Apostle speaks of an incorruptible crown. He speaks of those in a race or conflict striving for a *corruptible* crown. The man who creates a record in an aeroplane; the man in business who exceeds his competitors -- they get a crown but it does not last. The moment it is obtained it begins to deteriorate. The Apostle was not concerned about that sort of crown, but about an incorruptible distinction and glory that will never deteriorate. Let us seek that. The Lord can give His own, and He will, distinctions, crowns that will never decay. I know what they will do with them. The elders had golden crowns which marked them off as men distinguished in their experience and wisdom for God here; but when they come into God’s presence they cast their crowns before the throne, saying “Thou art worthy”.
Young people, let me urge you to have your eye on an incorruptible crown. The apostle says (he could speak with certainty as to himself) “Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness ... and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing”. What is it to love His appearing? It is to love the day when one absolute
{69}
Monarch will rule. Democracy will disappear and one will, will govern the whole earth. Do you love that day? Do you love the surrender of your own will, in the home, amongst your friends, in relation to the powers that be? Do you love the principle of subjection to the Lord? If you love the day when there will be only one will and one Master, there will be a crown for you in that day.
The apostle Peter brings forward again and again what is incorruptible, for he had a great sense of the corruption that is in the world through lust. He speaks about an incorruptible ornament which he desires should be upon us all, upon the women particularly, but the women are a figure of the place of the church, and it is really for us all. “Whose adorning  ... let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit”. A meek, and quiet spirit is the spirit of Jesus. You remember what marked the meek man Moses, when Aaron and Miriam spoke against him. You know you may get that sometimes. Aaron was a great man, the saint of the Lord, and Miriam a prophetess and leader of the dances and praise to God. But there came a moment when they allowed jealousy in their hearts. No matter who we are, however well advanced, our hearts are susceptible to the
{70}
principle of jealousy. So Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses, God’s servant, whom He manifestly supported. But Moses did not say one word to stand up for his own rights. It says, “the man Moses was very meek”. What an incorruptible ornament; how he adorns God’s system of things. Most of us have other kinds of ornaments.
Let our own dignity, the place we think we ought to have, be questioned, and what sort of ornaments come out? God would have us wear the incorruptible ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in His sight of great price. God had something to say to Aaron and Miriam, but Moses leaves his judgment, his matter with God, just like the Lord, “who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not; but committed himself to him who judgeth righteously”.
Now half the difficulties that arise among the people of God are because these ornaments are lacking. We take offence because someone has said something against us, and our place and our dignity are in danger. That is an opportunity for the Lord’s gracious help by the Spirit, that we may show some of those ornaments that will glisten for all eternity, and come out at all times with this incorruptible ornament of a meek and quiet spirit.
{71}
The end of it for us will be -- and it will soon be here -- “this corruptible must needs put on incorruptibility”. This mortal body is corruptible, as we know by sad experience, but God’s work will be completed. And when He has secured an incorruptible inward man, an inward moral being that is incorruptible according to God and Christ, suitable to have a crown, with suitable ornaments and other features that the Apostle speaks of -- when that work is completed by the Holy Spirit in our souls, God is going to clothe the inward man with an incorruptible body. “This corruptible must needs put on incorruptibility, and this mortal put on immortality”. It is not yet, though it may be in a moment. God will give His beloved people bodies of incorruptibility to enjoy that incorruptible scene where the incorruptible God dwells, where the blessed ark of the covenant is, the incorruptible Man.
These are the things that God would convey to our souls now. Incorruptibility has been brought to light through the gospel. The precious gospel brings us into living touch with what is incorruptible, and that is our salvation practically from a corrupted world.
{72}
THE MARYS
@John 19: 25 - 27; @Acts 1: 12 - 14
I was much impressed with the comment of the Spirit of God in regard to Mary of Bethany. “It was *that* Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair”. It was *that* Mary. The Spirit of God says this to distinguish *that* Mary from all other Marys. I believe in that way the Lord designates the peculiar feature of *that* Mary. She had learned what bitterness was, for Mary, as we know, means “bitter”. Naomi says, coming back from the land of Moab, a widow and bereft of her sons, “Call me not Naomi, call me Mara (or Mary) for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me”. She had tasted the bitterness of death, and she says, “Call me Mara”.
Now it is remarkable how the Spirit of God has gathered together in the gospels, particularly in the gospel of John, these Marys. They are all found there, showing, I believe, that they had a history in connection with what was bitter to the flesh. They had learned in sorrow and
{73}
bitterness, that which fitted them for the place they were going to have in the mind of God. So that Mary of Bethany had learned to set aside all that would distinguish herself. “It was *that* Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair”. She had learned the worthlessness of human glory. She had learned, dear brethren, that there was only one blessed Person to be dignified, so she takes what she might have adorned herself with -- the ointment of spikenard very costly, and her hair which was *her* glory, and she bestows them upon Christ. She had learned in sorrow, that human glory is worthless. It is not an easy lesson. It is a lesson of intense bitterness to the natural heart. See how Jacob had to learn it. When Reuben was born his heart was held by the possibilities of Reuben his firstborn; he says, “Reuben thou art my firstborn ... the excellency of dignity and the excellency of power”. Potentially Jacob saw in Reuben what was excellent, and the possibilities that lay in him, but in the bitterness of his heart he had to learn that he could not attach excellency to the first man; there *is* no excellence.
You say, I believe that, I read it in scripture; that is not what “Mary” means. “Mary” means that you have learned it through bitter lessons, you have learned that you cannot
{74}
attach excellency to the first man. Jacob had to learn that he could not put any trust in Reuben, however dignified, however outwardly excellent he may have found him; he says he is “unstable as water”. You cannot attach dignity to the first man. That is not to be only a doctrine that we believe in a formal way because it is in scripture. Mary learned in the bitterness of her own heart that there was no one worthy of dignity and glory but Christ, and she accepted that. She was *that* Mary. I would like to speak about the others.
It says “there stood by the cross of Jesus”; they *stood* there, “his mother, and his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Cleopas, and Mary Magdalene”. The Spirit of God has gathered these three Marys, and I want to speak of these as found at the cross, that the Lord might help us to see the deep lessons that they passed through, the bitter lessons to their hearts, in accordance with their names, which they learned there, so that as learning them they can rightly take their place in the upper room.
You see when you come to the upper room in the beginning of the Acts -- the spiritual sphere, the upper room is above the level of this world which is filled with human ideas, natural thoughts and human greatness -- there
{75}
is an upper room, there is a spot outwardly insignificant, a room, not a cathedral, not a palace, just a room, but it is above the level of the world, and these beloved women are there in the beginning of the Acts, they are there -- wonderful thing! But you say, Peter is there, yes, Peter is there; and John is there, but the women are there too. What does that mean? It means that the subjective side is there as well as the responsible. Not only are they there responsibly and publicly as a matter of light, as knowing what is right according to God, but they are there according to their inward state.
I believe that is what the Lord wants at the end, as He had at the beginning. He not only had Peter and James and John in the beginning, but He had the women also. That is to say, their inward state corresponded with their public position. The light they had, and their inward state, were in agreement. That is of the utmost importance at the present time. I believe the Lord would effect that in the hearts of His people, that we not only have the thing as light and know it as a guide and rule, but that we are there in the inward secret subjective condition of our hearts. This is going to cost us something. You want the Marys for that. So it says, “with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus”. “The women”
{76}
include these Marys undoubtedly, though only one of them is named.
Now I would just like to say what I believe would prepare those three Marys, through intense bitterness of soul exercise, for the wonderful position of the upper room. The first one was Mary the mother of Jesus. She *stood* there, not that she just came and went, but it says she stood there, contemplating that scene. I do not think we could ever tell what must have passed through her heart. She had a wonderful place in connection with the Lord, a place that none else has ever had. She knew something of the greatness of His person. The angel had said to her that she was highly favoured among women, that all generations would call her blessed, that the One that was to be born should be called Jesus, Saviour, One who could save. “Thou ... shalt call his name Jesus”. So great was He that He was Saviour not only for Israel, or for the Gentiles, but *the Saviour*. Then too, “He shall be great and shall be called the Son of the Highest”. What a name for Mary to hear, “the Son of the Highest”, come right from the very highest point in the universe, from the untreated sphere. Think of a sphere that was never created, that is above the heavens. We sometimes forget that the heavens were created. God created the heavens. You think
{77}
of what is beyond the heavens, the uncreated sphere where God is, and this blessed One came from the highest. The angel went on to tell her, “that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God”.
You can understand the great thoughts that filled Mary’s heart as she thought of herself as linked up in a special and peculiar way with this blessed One, so that she was blessed among women. Yet, who can tell the bitterness of that moment to her heart, when she saw everything that she had hoped for, all the hopes that she had centred in Christ, herself as connected with them, being broken to pieces. The Lord had indicated a little of this to her beforehand, and indeed the Spirit of God had at the outset, little as she might have understood it. Simeon had said when he took the Lord as a child in his arms “a sword shall pierce through thine own soul also”. The Lord had sought to prepare Mary for that moment. At the age of twelve He had said to her “wist ye not that I must be about my Father’s business?” when she said, “why hast thou thus dealt with us?” He had indicated even at twelve years of age that there was other business than that of His mother and Joseph that compelled His attention. She understood not, but she kept these sayings in her heart and pondered them.
{78}
Then in the beginning of the gospel of John the Lord enlightens her further. At the wedding in Cana of Galilee she says to the Lord, “They have no wine”. The Lord says to her, “Woman what have I to do with thee “. He would convey to her that He had passed out of the sphere where she could control Him. She accepted it, she turns to the servants and says, “Whatsoever he saith unto you do”. She gets a ray of light there, that it is not a question of what she would say though she is the mother of Jesus. Mary gets the light that it is all important what *He* says, it is what *He* says, not what *I* say.
But now has come the moment of the cross when all that she had built on, and the peculiar place that she had in relation to the Lord, disappears for ever; she is now no longer to know Him as her son, she is now no longer to have a leading place as the mother of Jesus. The Lord ends that relationship and commits her to John; John is to be her son, and Mary is to be his mother. The relationship she has had to Him is over for all eternity. What a scene, what a lesson to Mary’s heart, to accept the setting aside of all claims and title in relation to what is natural, on the natural side. That fitted her for the upper room. She learned that lesson in the bitterness of her heart; she stood at the cross and saw it all there, and
{79}
she is afterwards found in the upper room. Wonderful! The Spirit of God names the Apostles, and then adds “the women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren”.
She is there, having left behind in the scene below all the rights and titles in respect of her link with Christ after the flesh; all glory, all title, all claim by her is dropped for ever. The fact that she was the mother of Jesus does not entitle her to preferential treatment in the upper room. She is just one of those who are there. She has learned at the cross the end of everything after the flesh. Like the Apostle who says, “Yea though we have known Christ after the flesh yet now henceforth know we him no more”. Mary had come to that, and that prepared her, it fitted her, to be in the upper room.
I wonder whether we have all learned that lesson and accepted it, that nothing in the natural sphere, nothing in the sphere of the flesh, gives us any standing in the upper room, nothing, not even if we had known Christ after the flesh. Mary the mother of Jesus stood at the cross, she saw and accepted the end of the choicest link after the flesh that anyone could ever know. Now we shall never be in the upper room rightly if we do not learn that lesson -- that what we have in a natural way
{80}
belonging to this scene, whether it be ability, whether it be that we have been entrusted with earthly resources, whether it be we have links in a natural way with what is of God through our parents or relationships, none of these things gives us one single right or standing in the upper room. We have no rights whatever because we are rich, or intelligent, or have a good understanding of things, a good deal of mental power, or that our relations have had a place in the testimony. None of that enters into the upper room, none of it; the cross is the end even of knowing Christ after the flesh, and you could not have a greater link than that. You come into the upper room in relation to the work of God in your soul.
What causes a good deal of difficulty amongst God’s people is that many think they ought to have preferential treatment because they have got certain links, such as father or mother, and they think that entitles them to special consideration. What we want to see is the work of God, for that is what counts. Mary the mother of Jesus is there as one who has stood at the cross and seen the end of everything after the flesh that was more precious to her heart than anything we can think of.
Now you come to another Mary -- Mary the
{81}
wife of Cleopas -- she stands there. I think the scripture would indicate to us what was going through her soul as she stood there. The Spirit of God tells us about Cleopas, and she is his wife. Cleopas speaks, and his wife would be in correspondence with him; she is the subjective side of what he says, and Cleopas tells us that they had wonderful hopes for the earth, wonderful hopes. They are walking along, you remember (@Luke 24: 18) (it does not say so, but no doubt it was Cleopas and his wife) and they are sad, and the Lord draws near to them and says, “What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another as ye walk and are sad?” and they said, “Thou ... hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days” and the Lord says, “What things?” and they say, “Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people”. They had wonderful hopes here for the earth, they were looking forward to a time of great joy and blessing on the earth, when Israel would have been redeemed from bondage and set free as a nation to serve God, and used to bow the nations under His great rule. But Mary the wife of Cleopas had stood by the cross, and she had seen every hope for the earth, all her hopes that she had built up in connection with earthly
{82}
things and earthly blessings, crushed for ever. “The chief priests and our rulers  ... crucified him”, and she witnessed it, and all their earthly hopes had gone. But when you see Mary the wife of Cleopas in the upper room she is there as having learned that lesson. Her portion is not on earth, she would not be in the upper room if her portion was on earth; her portion is in heaven now; she has seen Him go into heaven, and she belongs to a company that is heavenly, and her blessings now are heavenly and spiritual; she is not now looking for the redemption of Israel, but she is appreciating what is heavenly.
We have to know the meaning of “Mary” to reach that subjectively. Naturally every one of us build up our hopes on earth; we were made naturally for the earth, “As is the earthy, so also are they that are earthy”; and naturally we are all earthy, and all our objects and hopes and desires and prospects naturally belong to the earth. Mary the wife of Cleopas standing by the cross saw all this terminate. The cross terminated all hopes for the earth in Mary’s heart, and henceforth, having seen Jesus go into heaven, she is found in the upper room, her objects and hopes now heavenly, not earthly. I submit that it is bitter to the natural heart to really accept that our portion is not on earth. I believe the Lord is using
{83}
the present conditions of the world, and will continue to use them, to help us to accept the lesson of Mary the wife of Cleopas. How easily we are deceived and diverted, secretly building up our hopes on earth, but that is not in accord with the upper room. The portion of those in the upper room is not on earth, it is in heaven, and Mary is there as having learned the lesson that she no longer hopes for anything on the earth, but all is connected with a blessed Man in heaven.
Then it says that Mary Magdalene is there. Who can tell what went through that woman’s heart as she stood at the cross. Mary Magdalene -- what a name! The Lord thinks a very great deal of Mary Magdalene. When He rose from the dead He appeared first to her; you think of that! The blessed One who moves beyond the realm of death does not do things by accident, He appears to whom He will. It says He appeared first to Mary Magdalene, showing the distinctive place that she had in His heart as one He loved. She stood at the cross. What would be going through her soul? She was that woman out of whom He cast seven devils; she had come into touch with the Lord. She was quite a different case to Mary the mother of Jesus and had an entirely different history, and altogether different, too, to Mary the wife of Cleopas.
{84}
She was a woman who had been absolutely dominated by the power of darkness, the seven demons mean complete domination by the devil; think of a woman like that. She might have appeared respectable enough outwardly, but as a woman she represents what was secret, secretly governed by the power of evil in every part of her moral being; but she met the Lord, and He had cast out those demons. In one view of them they are cast out, in another they went out of her; with the might of His own blessed power He had caused them to go out, and He had taken possession of her heart; so much so, that ever after that she followed Him, and she ministered to Him of her substance. He exercised a dominating influence over her soul, He took the place of the seven demons. The seven demons had dominated that woman’s life, now the Lord dominates her, and she ministers to Him of her substance, and she followed Him everywhere. You find her often mentioned as following the Lord, and she followed right up to the cross. She followed Him, she had learned to love Him; He had become the object of her heart, and it says she stood at the cross of Jesus.
I think we can tell a little of what must have passed through her soul; there was the One who was her Lord, as she says, “*My* Lord”, “They have taken away *my* Lord”. Whatever
{85}
He was to anyone else, He was *her* Lord, her own Lord. He had delivered her from the power of darkness, He had captivated her heart; she stands by the cross of Jesus. She sees the princes of this world crucify the Lord of glory. She knows who He is, she knows He is the Lord of glory, the One who is supreme in power, but she witnesses the princes of the world, Pilate, Herod, the chief priests, the rulers, the soldiers, joining hands to crucify her Lord. What a bitter lesson to her heart! What an exposure to Mary of what this world is. The world stood exposed to Mary at that moment. She has finished with the world, she has no confidence in it whatever, she is not deceived as to its principles of lust and pride. The world is condemned in Mary Magdalene’s heart for ever. She would come up into the upper room in absolute refusal of every worldly principle; she would not allow one element of the world in the upper room; if it appears, she condemns it.
You can understand with what pleasure she followed the disciples in the selection of a man to take Judas’s place. She is one of “the women”, and they go over the question of who is to replace Judas; they want a man whose heart is right. They would carry Mary Magdalene with them when they prayed, “Thou Lord which knowest the hearts of all
{86}
men show whether of these two thou hast chosen”. You can understand how she would say Amen to that. She wants a heart that loves Christ and rejects the principle of gain; Judas loved the principle of gain, he was like Balaam, he loved the reward of unrighteousness, he loved money; Mary Magdalene would refuse that. You can understand that Mary Magdalene would concur when Ananias and Sapphira were cut off; they brought forward a worldly principle, seeking to get it in amongst God’s people to use what they had in a material way, not for the Lord’s interests to minister to Him, but to get a name for themselves. She would have been in accord with the judgment of that absolutely, because she stood at the cross of Jesus, and she has allowed her heart to learn this bitter lesson that they who are the friends of the world are the enemies of God; she would not bring into the upper room one worldly feature. Naturally we put confidence in the world; we build our hopes on this world’s system, but it is exposed at the cross; you cannot trust the world. The cross shows that the world is a vast system opposed to God, and it has crucified the Lord of glory, and not one worldly principle belongs to the upper room, not one.
Now you put these three Marys together and you will see the gain they would bring to that
{87}
upper room. One not claiming any rights because of links after the flesh, however great; that is Mary the mother of Jesus, she does not claim anything because she is the mother of Jesus, she has seen that that relationship is ended for ever. Then Mary the wife of Cleopas is there with a definite sense that all her hopes are in heaven, not on earth; she no longer looks for anything here, but her hopes, her blessings, lie in heaven where Jesus is. As the Apostle says, “have your mind on the things that are above”. And then Mary Magdalene is there as having accepted the absolute exposure of a world that crucified her Lord, so that she would not give place for a moment to one principle of the world.
These are some of the features in the upper room. Such secret conditions provide for the presence of the Spirit of God in power. The Spirit would produce them at the end as at the beginning, so that these features should be livingly and subjectively formed amongst God’s people. We have to admit that it is the “Marys” that contribute largely; it is they who learn the bitterness and reality of these things to the natural heart, and accept the bitterness; they do not want to alter their name, their name is “Mary”, that is, they have accepted the bitterness, the setting aside of the natural, the setting aside of the earthly,
{88}
and the exposure of the world; they have accepted that, and they are fitted to have their place in the upper room.
May the Lord help us all to travel on these lines, so that the upper room may become increasingly real to us.
{89}
LEADERSHIP
@Isaiah 11: 6; @Revelation 12: 1 - 12
One desires, dear friends, to indicate a little the character of leadership that will enable us to go on together. We all, I have no doubt, realise that the great movement of the enemy -- of Satan -- is to destroy true leadership, indeed, that leadership should disappear, so that under the influence of democracy, which is Satan’s last weapon to destroy man, the idea of rulers and leaders should be hated. But leadership is of God; in every sphere controlled by God and by heaven that principle prevails. You find it, of course, in its fulness and perfection in Christ, He is the Prince or Leader -- “Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour”, @Acts 5: 31. He has been made *the* Leader. How often the Lord used the expression, both prophetically and when here, conveying the thought that He is the Leader. He says, “I lead” -- and He will always lead: He is God’s chosen and anointed Leader. What marks leaders is, that they lead. They do not have elections,
{90}
but they lead, as Deborah said in her song, “For that leaders led in Israel ... Bless Jehovah!” @Judges 5: 2, N.T. That is what the Lord will always do. He will lead in every sphere.
The same principle is seen amongst the angels, innumerable hosts as they are -- there is no democratic character among them; God has established among them princes, leaders -- an archangel is a prince (@Daniel 10: 13, 21; @Jude 9). It is a principle that also exists in the assembly according to God. The Apostle says, “Remember your leaders”, and “Obey your leaders”, that is, God would raise up and maintain those who are qualified to lead. The Devil, while blinding men as to the evil of democracy, recognises no such principle; what he aims at is that *he* should be prince, the prince of this world, the great leader who leads the whole system -- that is what he believes in, and amongst his own hosts there are principalities and powers, there are mighty leaders of darkness -- “the rulers of the darkness of this world”, @Ephesians 6: 12. So one desires that the Lord might help us to see, first the great principle of leadership, and then to see the character of the one who is qualified to lead.
In the passage we read in Isaiah there is a wonderful statement. You have a wolf and a lamb, a leopard and a kid, a young lion and
{91}
a calf, and a fatted beast; and they are together. You say, “That is impossible”. One often feels in regard to certain local conditions that the position is impossible. You see such a divergence of character -- natural character -- such different natural temperaments and desires and outlooks, that at first glance we might think that those people can never go on together, they will fall out before long; and so they will unless they are led. You would never keep a wolf and a lamb together naturally; or a leopard and a kid together; or a young lion and a fatted beast together, unless you have leadership of such a character, that the control is so great, that they are preserved from what they are naturally. Now what kind of a person could do that? The world would think -- we would all think naturally -- you want some mighty tyrant of indomitable will, who will compel every one to yield. That is the kind of leader that men will shortly get, he will come up out of the bottomless pit, and he will go into perdition and lead the world into perdition with him. But that is not what the Spirit of God speaks of as leadership. He says, “a little child shall lead them”. The influence of a little child is so great and powerful that it can make the wolf and the lamb lie down together -- it can alter the whole character of everything.
{92}
I wonder if we believe it. You can see it in scripture, and you can see it amongst ourselves. How is it possible that persons who would not walk together naturally go on together for years and years, and happily? It is because they are under the leadership of the little child, that is why. The mighty power of the little child is exercised over their hearts so they lie down together. That is what happened in regard of Saul of Tarsus. He was a wolf naturally; scattering, killing, ravening. He was a leopard, though he thought he had no spots, thought that he was blameless, he found out that he was indelibly spotted. He was a young lion, exceedingly mad, full of fury, when he roared, everyone feared. And there is Ananias, he is a lamb, defenceless, timid; he is a kid, separate from all that was going on in the world, in Damascus; he is a calf, pursuing his way patiently, serving others; and you see these two in Damascus together. Ananias goes to where Saul is, and he says, “Saul, brother, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest hath sent me”, @Acts 9: 17. He approached at first timidly, fearing that he could never lie down with such a man as that; but you see what had happened was that Saul had met the “little child” on the way to Damascus, he had met this “little child” who leads -- he had met
{93}
Jesus -- He was on the throne, but He was Jesus. As Saul pursues his way with these destructive features, the Lord says to him, “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” -- just like a little child would speak. Not like a great mighty ruler would speak, but just as a little child would speak. “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” As though He would say, “What have I done that you should hate Me without a cause and be mine enemy wrongfully?” As the Lord said in the psalm, “They hated me without a cause”. He never gave them any cause. He is saying that to Saul: “They that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully”, the Lord said, “are mighty”, @Psalm 69: 4, but it was just the approach of a little child, and Saul says, “Who art thou. Lord?” and the answer comes back, “I am *Jesus*” ... Jesus brings to our hearts all the features of a little child. And Saul comes under the mighty control and leadership of the “little child,” so that he says to Jesus, “*Lord*, what wilt thou have me to do?” The power of that approach was such that in principle he said to the Lord, knowing Him now as Jesus, “Lord, lead me”, and they took him by the hand and led him to Damascus.
Now there is the lamb in Damascus and the kid and the calf, and the Lord says to that one, “Ananias. And he said, Behold I am
{94}
here, Lord.” And the Lord said unto him, “Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judas for one called Saul of Tarsus: for behold, he prayeth”. Ananias said, as it were, “Lord, he is a lion, he is a leopard, he is a wolf”. “I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem: and here he hath authority from the chief priests to bind all that call upon thy name”. But the Lord said, “he is a chosen vessel unto me -- Go thy way”, and he goes down, and they lie down together, both of them led by this mighty power of the “little child”.
Now the scripture we read in Revelation shows us the power of the Man Child caught up to the throne of God, set in the place of supreme authority -- “unto God”, it says, “and his throne”. It is such that every feature of the power of evil disappears -- the result of the enthronement of the Man Child. The Spirit of God says, “the Man Child”; it does not view the Lord in that passage as having pursued His life through this world and reached maturity as to His years here, but He is looked upon in that passage as if taken up from birth, caught up to God and His throne -- the little Child is put on the throne of God in heaven, and the consequences of that are that the dragon, the old serpent, the Devil
{95}
and Satan, is cast out of heaven and there is no place found for him there. Now, that indicates for us, the enthronement in our hearts of Jesus, in the character of the Man Child, there is power that is capable of displacing the whole power of evil.
Every believer has available to him a power that will displace every character of evil; every local gathering has available to it in the enthronement of the Man Child, the power for casting out every kind of evil that may have a footing there. It is available to the church as a whole if only it be used, it is great enough to cleanse the heavens, it is great enough to cleanse -- and ultimately it will cleanse -- the earth. Do we believe it? That there is available to us, if we will allow the Man Child to rule, a power that will displace every principle of evil that exists, first in our own hearts, then where we are, and then ultimately, in the whole scene, heaven and earth. Now you might say, What does the catching up to God and His throne of the Man Child mean? It means that the power expressed in the Man Child, is such, that it can displace evil in every form. Let us look for a moment at what these features are, or some of them.
You see over against the Man Child is the great red dragon. What a contrast! Think of
{96}
a little Child, as this passage presents it, just born. “She brought forth”, it said, “a man child ... and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne”. Let us have in our hearts that wonderful presentation of Christ over against the great red dragon. What a contrast! What marks the great red dragon is that it is an immense creature, it draws the third part of the stars of heaven with its tail. And the Spirit of God says it is red, that is, it is conspicuous in this world; there is no more conspicuous colour than red, you can see it anywhere. But look at a little child, how small it is, nothing large, nothing great outwardly, so lowly, so dependent, nothing conspicuous. What can you do with a little child in this world? Yet the consequence of the enthronement of the Man Child is that the dragon is cast out.
Look at the Lord Jesus. Think of Him in Bethlehem -- what lowliness! It says, “She brought forth her firstborn son ... and laid him in a manger” -- there is nothing great, nothing conspicuous, about that. I doubt if anyone else but Jesus ever had such a reception, certainly none of us, or anything like it. You follow Him through this scene at Nazareth; there is nothing great about Nazareth, and there is nothing great about Christ in Nazareth as this world accounts
{97}
greatness. You see Him going through His life in this world, how small He was! He had not where to lay His head. Ministered to by those who loved Him, but He had nothing of His own. See Him at Calvary, no feature of human greatness there, nothing conspicuous, nothing that this world calls great and notable there. If we will let that blessed Man Child come into our hearts and rule He will cast out the great red dragon so that no place is found for him. There is power in that blessed One, in Jesus, to displace everything.
Then, the old serpent. You think of Jesus in the character of a little child and you put alongside in contrast the old serpent -- what a contrast! No greater contrast could there be than a little child and the old serpent! What marks the old serpent from the outset is that he is the father of lies, he is the source of all deception, he is “more subtle than any beast of the field”. Subtlety, deception, lying and darkness -- all those elements come from the serpent, the old serpent. But when Jesus comes on the throne the old serpent is cast down and there is no place for him.
What marked Jesus, was transparency. Normally a little child is absolutely simple and transparent in everything, just what he is, and pretending to be nothing else he hides nothing. That was Jesus. He walked through this
{98}
scene in absolute transparency. At the trial the Lord demonstrates it: He said “I spake openly” -- “In secret,” He said, “have I said nothing ... ask them which heard me what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I said”, @John 18: 21. That is transparency: that is just what a little child is. The Lord said, “I spake openly  ... and in secret have I said nothing”.
I believe a great deal of the trouble that exists between brethren, between families, and generally, has at the root of it a lie, some deception, some elements of darkness, that have not been judged, some covetous principles, there is something hidden at the bottom. When the Man Child comes on the throne the old serpent goes out, there is no place for him. That is what happened to Saul, he had a place of greatness in this world, he was of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Pharisee of the Pharisees, but when the Man Child was enthroned in his heart, all the greatness of Saul of Tarsus disappeared, and he was called Paul, which means “little”. That comes in remarkably as he is about to meet the sorcerer, Elymas the sorcerer, “child of the devil, enemy of all righteousness” -- how will he meet it? By becoming little; it is at that time it is said “who also is called Paul” -- that is how he meets it. Paul says,
{99}
consequent on Jesus being enthroned, we “have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God”, @2 Corinthians 4: 2. That is transparency. How did he become like that? By the Man Child being enthroned: and the old serpent was cast out and there was found no place for him.
The Spirit of God goes on to speak of the Devil. Could you conceive anything in greater contrast than the Man Child and the Devil? The Devil conveys to us all that is awful, all that is terrible. “Your adversary the devil”, it says, “as a roaring lion”, @1 Peter 5: 8. Nobody would care to approach a roaring lion, everyone would tremble at the thought of having to do with a roaring lion -- the Devil. But a little child is the most accessible of all: there is no one, there is nothing, so accessible as a little child, whether he be the child of a king or the child of a beggar, the normal condition of a little child is that anyone can approach him. The Man Child is on the throne, and the Devil is cast out, there is no place for him. How accessible Jesus was and is!
The shepherds could come with the utmost ease of heart and spirit into the presence of that little Child wrapped in swaddling clothes
{100}
and lying in a manger. There was no terror filling their hearts as they drew near to that wondrous spot. Simeon could take Him in his arms and bless God. The man full of leprosy dared not approach anybody on earth till he saw Jesus, and he came up, it says, and kneeled down. The woman of the city which was a sinner dared not to come near the Pharisee, he was too great, too unapproachable, but when she knew *Jesus* was there she brought a box of ointment and stood at His feet. A blind beggar could expect no audience with the great of this world, he dared not call out to them, but when he heard that Jesus was passing by, he cried “Jesus ... have mercy on me”. The dying thief, to whom could he go? Who would listen to a dying malefactor? Would Pilate? Never for a moment. Would Herod? Never! Would the priests? They would not look that way. Would the soldiers? Not at all; they would not disgrace their uniform. Would Jesus? Yes, he could approach Jesus. He is so blessedly accessible that he could appeal to Him.
We see also, that those who come under the influence of that blessed One on the throne become accessible. The apostle Paul was, I suppose, one of the most accessible men in the world after he called Jesus, Lord. Anyone who had a godly concern could write to him
{101}
and come to him, he was within reach indeed he said to the Corinthians who were reigning as kings, “we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus¬ sake”, @2 Corinthians 4: 5.
The consequence of the enthronement of the Man Child is that Satan is cast out. Satan is the accuser, night and day he accuses the brethren before God. He hates them and he accuses them night and day. Jesus at the right hand of God intercedes for us, His mission there on the throne is to intercede: as the Apostle says, “who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us”, @Romans 8: 34. Could you have a greater contrast -- an Intercessor -- an abiding Intercessor: and one who night and day accuses! If the one rules, the other goes.
Dear friends, if we allow that blessed Man Child upon the throne of our hearts, upon the throne in the gatherings, the accuser of the brethren will be cast out, there will be no place for him. That is what marked the blessed Lord here; in all its brilliant glory it shines out at Calvary. They were accusing Him, accusing Him falsely. The accusations that they bring are false, but what does He do? He intercedes in the presence of those that hated Him without a cause. Looking round upon the whole scene He does not
{102}
accuse, He prays for them. As sure as that blessed One comes on the throne the accuser will be cast down. One would ask that each of us may face this question. There is ever a danger of accusation. That means, Jesus has lost His place in our hearts. That we no longer are being ruled by the One who rules in heaven. He is on the throne of God, He is caught up to God, it says, and His throne. We can never be right unless we are in accord with heaven, and on the throne of God is the Intercessor, and the consequence of that is, the accuser is cast out.
All the elements of darkness, of secrecy, of accusation behind the scenes, spring from Satan. It is well to face it. The origin of accusation is Satan. If there are things that *should* be said, they should be said *openly*. “I spake openly,” the Lord says. The source of all movements that are not open and transparent is the Devil. I would urge all of us to recognise that, and judge. “If thy brother,” it says, “shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault”, @Matthew 18: 15. Do we do it? Or do we accuse him? Do we go and see him? That is God’s way -- go and see him. The Lord ever spake openly. If only we will let that principle into our hearts, the accuser of the brethren will be cast down. What a power is in the Man
{103}
Child! He is the little Child that leads the lion and the calf, the leopard and the kid, the wolf and the lamb, so that they are *together* according to God.
You can see that worked out, a feature of the enthronement of the Man Child, most blessedly in Stephen. He “looked up”, it says, “and saw the glory of God and Jesus”, @Acts 7: 55. He looked up and he saw the Man Child on God’s throne and he took character from Him. His heart expanded to give place to Jesus in that character. As he kneeled down there was nothing like the great red dragon about him, he was a lone, dependent man under the rule of Jesus as Lord. He sees God. “Blessed” it says, “are the pure in heart, for they shall see God”, @Matthew 5: 8. And he saw the glory of God. There was nothing about Stephen that would terrify, though indeed they could not resist the spirit and the wisdom with which he spake. The Devil in his terrifying character in no way influenced Stephen, Satan, the accuser, had no place in his heart. As he saw Jesus on the throne, instead of accusing, for he might have accused them, he had cause to complain -- he intercedes. It says they gnashed on him with their teeth; he had never given them any occasion for it. They “ran upon him with one accord, and cast him out
{104}
of the city and stoned him “, but he did not accuse. Satan, the accuser of the brethren, had no entrance into his heart because Jesus was enthroned. He intercedes for them.
If there is that which is troubling us, do not let us accuse, but let us pray. God will come in if we pray, and if there is that which *should* be said, let it be, as with Stephen, said openly. Openly he said, “Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye”. There is nothing secret about it: but then, having said all that, he intercedes for them. He says, “Lord, lay not this sin to their charge”. There is a man who corresponds with heaven. As Jesus as the Man Child has His place on the throne of God, these awful features of Satan disappear from heaven, and as Jesus in this, character is enthroned in our hearts and gatherings, so surely will those features disappear. Let us henceforth give place to this blessed One as Ruler, as Leader enthroned in this character. May the Lord grant it to us all.
{105}
THE VALUE OF ONE DAY
@Mark 1: 21 - 39; @Mark 14: 17, 18; @Mark 15: 42 to end
I should like to present a few suggestions which the Lord might use to help us to put more value upon one day.
I believe the Lord is giving a sense in the hearts of His people everywhere, that we have not many days left; the time is short, as scripture says. However short it is, one would desire that the Lord might help us to look upon one day with the desire that there might be more for God in each day as it comes round. Apart from the imminence of the Lord’s return, we have but few days in any case, and the scripture exhorts us to number them. We have not a large reserve of days, possibly we have but a few. Jacob could say that few and evil had been the days of the years of his pilgrimage, he admitted that they were few and evil. The days of our years are three score and ten, or if, by reason of strength, they are four score yet they soon pass away. How quickly they go past, apart from the fact that the Lord is coming! I would desire that we should all get a sense of the preciousness of
{106}
each day that is left to us. None of us can say much about tomorrow, indeed, we can say nothing definite about it. We can only speak of what is available to us today; we can only say about tomorrow, “If the Lord will “.
Now I desire to touch upon two days of the Lord’s wonderful life, what days they were! I believe every day of the life of Jesus was equivalent to a thousand years, in the divine estimate. As God looked down on one day of the life of Jesus there was as much for Him and more, than in any other life of a thousand years. There was more in the life of Jesus in one day than in the life of Methuselah -- life of nearly a thousand years. One day with the Lord is as a thousand years.
I would like to present to you what the divine thought is about *our* days, about each day as it comes to us in our lives here. First of all, and necessarily so, there is to be the recognition of the Creator in each of our hearts. Some may say, “I thought we had passed that”, but we never pass it; the scripture says, “The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament showeth his handiwork. Day unto day uttereth speech and night unto night showeth knowledge”, @Psalm 19: 1, 2. God has something to say every day; as the heavens appear to our eyes in the morning,
{107}
God is speaking to the hearts of men and to our hearts. God wants us to listen and hear so that every day there should be an answer from our hearts to Him as Creator, who as Paul says, “is blessed for ever, Amen”, @Romans 1: 25. That indicates that for ever the Creator will be blessed. I believe that word “blessed” means there eulogised, spoken well of. There is not much that man has done and made that one could say much good about today. I think we are near the day when men will not bless their own *works*, they will wish that aeroplanes, motors, wireless, had never been discovered; there will be nothing good to say about them. These discoveries will bring such woe, and distress, and misery, which are indeed already beginning. Men will not bless their *works* then, but the Creator is to be blessed for ever, and God desires that He should be blessed from our hearts every day and every night. As every day dawns with the heavens declaring His glory, God desires a response from our hearts in blessing the Creator.
In the early church they gathered together and said, “Lord, thou art God which hast made heaven and earth and the sea and all that in them is” -- we need to recognise that. Is it not well to recognise these things and to bless the Creator everywhere and every day?
{108}
God desires, from our hearts, each day, the lowly acknowledgment of His might and of His glory.
Then there is another feature that I believe He wants in us every day, that is true dependence. One of the disciples said, “Teach us to pray”, and the Lord said, “When ye pray say ... Give us day by day our daily bread”. I do not refer to the previous part of the prayer, but the Lord as recorded in Matthew’s gospel, said they were to pray, “Give us this day our daily bread”. I believe He is bringing us back to that, because the prosperity of the last thirty years has injured many, and much of the true spirit of dependence has been weakened, but God is helping us through adversity, to return more truly and livingly, to the spirit of dependence on Him for what He gives us *each day*. If we look into our hearts, we shall find that most of our fears are about tomorrow. Most of the things that are weighing upon us, and filling us with perplexity as to what might come, have to do with tomorrow. The Lord did not speak of tomorrow, He said, “Give us *this* day -- this day -- our daily bread”.
How perfectly He adorned His teaching; nothing makes one more ashamed than the life of Jesus. Think of each of His days; from where did His bread come? Forty days He
{109}
spent without bread, He was waiting for God; never would He move without God, as He trod His way through this scene. Apparently the Lord never had money; when he wanted a penny, He said, “Show me a penny”, yet the Lord did not starve as a Man here. Where did He sleep? He had not a home, He had not what the foxes have, nor what the birds of the air have. Each day was a matter for God to provide for Him. “Give us this day our daily bread.” God sought to teach the children of Israel that, as they went through the wilderness. Each morning the dew came on the face of the wilderness and on the dew was the manna, the bread from heaven, from God, for the day. There was a vast company of people in the wilderness; you could understand that many might have thought, What about tomorrow? There is the bread now, but what about tomorrow? They had to learn to depend upon God for each day.
How Elijah was tested as to that and instructed. There he was by the brook Cherith, he drank of the water of the brook and morning and evening the ravens brought him bread and flesh. If Elijah had not learned to depend upon God he might have said, “What about tomorrow?” It is so unnatural for a raven to leave flesh -- but Elijah had to learn
{110}
to live day by day in dependence upon God who said, “I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there”. The things which we think are so adverse, so destructive, and the last source from which we expect support, are often God’s ravens which He has commanded, and they have to obey His commands. God makes a situation that looks difficult and hopeless to yield meat for His people. He will do this to the end, so we have to learn to pray, “Give us this day our daily bread”.
There is one more feature that I want to refer to. David says, “So will I sing forth thy name for ever, performing my vows from day to day”, @Psalm 61: 8, N.T. As each day comes round we should pay our vows, what we have put our hands to, what we have committed ourselves to; we should pay that each day. The Lord wants that, He wants each day to be filled in with the payment of the vows. That is the sort of day that God loves, the kind of day that marked the life of Jesus. He was always seen in perfect subjection and dependence, and accepted the place of outward weakness. “When he was reviled, he reviled not again, and when he suffered he threatened not.” He never asserted His rights anywhere. He never found His portion on earth from the joys of this life. He could thank God for the bread, and fish, and
{111}
ask for a drink of water from the woman of Samaria, but He never once found His portion upon this earth. He entered this scene saying, “Lo, I come to do thy will O God”; every day He did the will of God.
We have most of us put our hands to things; we have baptised our households, we have been baptised ourselves. It is a bond we have entered into, to hold our households and ourselves for God, as living outside this world’s system. God finds great pleasure in those who pay their vows every day. Most of us put our hands to the cup and bless it, the communion of the blood of Christ, the bond of the fellowship of His death. God’s will is that it should be paid every day, not on the Lord’s Day only, but every day of our lives that vow should be paid in the sight of God. We have put our hands to the bread which we break, the communion of the body of Christ, for we being many are one bread, one body, for we all partake of that one loaf, we are connected livingly with one another. God desires that that should be recognised and the vow paid every day. This indicates a little how each day is to be filled in, we shall not be idle if these things are before us for the day.
And then dependent upon Him daily for our bread, not only materially, but in every
{112}
way. Every morning our ear opened to listen and to hear what He has to say. The Lord said, “He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed”, @Isaiah 50: 4. Think of a day beginning like that! Such would be one of the days of heaven upon the earth. Then we are to step out each day ready to pay our vows. I am sure such days as those would have value in the sight of God. We would not have to say at the end, “Few and evil have been my days”. They may be few but they would not be evil; they would be the days of heaven upon earth.
Now, just a word as to these two days of the life of Jesus. Every movement that is of God amongst His people springs from an impression of Christ. There is no value in what we do as a matter of duty, it does not yield anything for God; what yields for God, is living movement springing from an impression of Christ in the heart.
So I would like to speak of this first day of which we read in the life of Jesus. It is one of the early days of Jesus in His public life. What a day it was! It began in the morning with His ear opened to hear; all His days began like that. Every single day began with His ear opened to listen to what God had to say, not one day did He step out
{113}
unmarked by that feature. Then let us consider the features that filled in His day. He went into the synagogue and sat down and taught. Most of us would have said that that was a good day’s work, and that we were entitled afterwards to rest. Those who profess to follow the Lord would say that was a hard day, but it was not the end for Jesus, there was a man in the synagogue with a demon, and He meets that with power; He does not leave it to anyone else, He takes it up and deals with it, He casts out the demon. Then He went to the house of Simon with James and John, not to rest, for Peter’s wife’s mother was lying ill with a fever, and immediately they tell Him of her! The Lord had spent the morning teaching, and dealing with the power of Satan; then He went to Peter’s house, and immediately they told Him of the illness, He is available for that; He went in and took her by the hand and raised her up.
Next we read, “evening being come, when the sun had gone down”. It says that “man goes to his labour until the evening”; he is entitled to rest then, but the evening being come and the sun having set they brought the whole city to the door. He goes out and healed many of their diseases, and cast out many demons; He is available to them right into the night. Then very early in the morning
{114}
He goes away alone to pray. If we put that day alongside of our days, we shall understand that one of them is like a thousand years to God. The memorial of those days is stored up in the golden pot that has manna, there is a divine memorial of each of those days treasured up before God, they are valued at their true worth by Him, and every day was like that one.
Now I want to say a word or two about the last day of Jesus on earth. I read the passages that record from evening to evening of that last day. That day began as always, with His ear being opened for instruction for the day; He knew where the road was leading, but He was committed to the will of God. He could see the direction in which the path was leading Him. In holy submission, which will ever bow our hearts, there was a shrinking from that day, yet He pursues it; He says, “Not my will”. He desires instruction for the day, though shrinking from the way it would take Him; He indicates how perfectly the will of God was going to govern Him. The day, as we read it in Mark, begins with the passover, the evening having come He goes with the twelve into the city to keep the passover. Then He went through the anguish of the presence of Judas; the sorrow of that was more than sufficient for one day, it was something
{115}
intolerable to the heart of the Lord. Then He instituted the supper; what an act that was! It has a present living voice to this day, for we come together on the first day of the week, and as we look on those emblems we do not go back 2000 years in our minds. It might have been today, it has such a wondrous meaning to our hearts.
Then the Lord goes out to Gethsemane; I do not touch on the other experiences of that day, but it would be well for us to look into them for ourselves, especially as presented in the gospel of John; chapters 15 to 19 are all one day in the life of Jesus -- the last day. But I want to pursue the line of Mark’s gospel. The Lord goes out to Gethsemane. Peter had spoken of following Him, but a moment was coming when no one could follow. Peter thought he could, but the Lord said to him, “thou canst not follow me now”. Where is the road leading? The Psalm puts it in language that conveys wonderful meaning, it says, “Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy cataracts; all thy breakers and thy billows are gone over me”, @Psalm 42: 7. That was where the road was leading, to the mighty cataracts of Calvary. What an impression for our hearts! The cataracts roar in all their mighty volume, all the waters of the great deep break.
{116}
The Lord in Gethsemane, anticipated that in His spirit. The road was leading that way for Jesus and He bowed to the will of God in all that came upon Him. Who can tell what it all meant? The curse -- He was made a curse for us -- our hearts cannot fathom such a thing, that is where the road led, to the place of the curse. It led to where the rod of God’s judgment fell upon Him; it led to the impenetrable darkness of Calvary, to the forsaking of Jesus; it led to the wrath of God against sin, to the death and burial of the Lord. That last day contained all that and more. It is divided into hours, it is so great, indicating that we cannot take it in as a whole. The Spirit of God speaks about evening being come, and then the third hour, the sixth hour, the ninth hour, and then again the evening, when His precious body is wrapped in linen and laid in a new tomb where man had never been laid. These are the last days of Jesus, and what shall we say about them? They are stored up in the golden pot that had manna, a blessed memorial of every day of those thirty-three years -- every one of them worth a thousand years in the sight of God. They come to us, the blessed savour of them, to help us as to our days. What are we doing with our days? God wants the days of His people to take character
{117}
from the days of Jesus, to be marked by the spirit of dependence and subjection, and by a daily rendering of vows. God would find much pleasure thus in His people.
I only desire to say again, that the Lord is giving a definite sense that the days will not be many. We should all desire that in these closing days God might find increasing pleasure in the lives of His people. The Lord grant it may be so.
{118}
THE OUTGOINGS OF MORNING AND EVENING
@Psalm 65: 8
“Thou makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.”
One has rejoiced to see that God always ends as He begins. It must be evident to all that this is right. If God sets out to do anything, it is done. The fact that God intends to do it, means it is done, for He reckons the things that be not as being. So that the beginning of anything that God does, indicates how He is going to end, because He is God.
The passage read indicates the same principle, found also in many other scriptures, that there is a correspondence between the morning and the evening, that the outgoings of the morning and the outgoings of the evening are alike -- they are both marked by joy. “Thou makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.” What comes out of the morning and what comes out of the evening are both alike in this character, that joy marks them. You can see that first of all in the material creation. What a wonderful thing the morning is! I sometimes think people are blind. The
{119}
word says, “the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not”. You take the morning, what a wonderful thing the morning is, to see the sun come up, is wonderful. To see the majesty and the glory of the sun come up over the horizon, dispelling the darkness with its mighty beams, in a power that makes man feel his own nothingness, is a wonderful sight.
What is man compared with the sun? Mere man I mean. Gather all the might of this world and ask them to delay the sun a second as his majesty arises. What could they do? The glory and the brilliance of it, the light and power of it, bring joy into our hearts as we look at it. The outgoings of the morning fill the pious heart with joy at the greatness of God, for it says, “he maketh his sun to rise”. Job was so occupied with himself, like men are today, that God said to him, “Hast thou commanded the morning?” Could he make the morning come? Of course he could not. If men would only open the eyes of their minds and hearts to see the wonders of God, it would keep them from the ever increasing tide of pride that will yet assume the place of God. But what I want to show is that the morning is marked by joy. “Joy cometh in the morning”, the joy of light and power, the new day approaching.
{120}
Then to come to the evening. What is there more wonderful than the evening? You stand and look, not at the east but at the west, and there is the same sun going down, shedding its closing beams upon the day in a beauty that ought to bow the heart in reverence to the Creator. So the evening and the morning correspond.
One is struck with the expression in the book of Genesis that God in setting those lights in the heavens made two great lights. It says, “the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night, and he made the stars also”. He said, “Let them be for signs and for seasons, and for days and years”. “Let them be for signs”. People recognise to some extent the seasons, because they cannot help it, and the days, for they have no control over them, they could not delay them for a second, and the years are not in their hands, but most people forget the signs, yet God puts them first. “Let them be for signs.” What do the signs mean? A sign is a finger-post pointing to something -- it is a witness to what is coming. What is it that the sun is a witness to each morning, as you see it come up over the horizon? It goes its course, and goes down at the end of the day. God is calling attention to the place that Christ has in heaven. It is a sign as to the place that Christ has, that
{121}
every morning He will shine into our hearts, and rule there and continue the whole day, thus His blessed beams would come down into our hearts and the night too would close with His shining: He should rule the day for us, each day, every day of our lives. That is why God has set that sign in the heavens, it is for us to see every day. He does not hide it, but sometimes we are blind and cannot see it.
Well, I just wanted to call attention, first of all, to the fact that the evening and the morning correspond in the physical creation. I do not know if anybody could tell which is the most beautiful, the most joyous, the morning or the evening, the sunrise or the sunset. Which is greatest? Which is the most blessed? Which beams are more desirable? No one can tell you -- both are wondrous. Thus we see that what is true in the physical is but a picture of what is true in the spiritual, as always, for God intends the whole material creation to be a portrayal of the spiritual so that we can with our finite minds take in the greatness of that which is spiritual. Hence He displays first the material, to illustrate to us the greatness of the spiritual.
Now if you come to some of the features of what God has done elsewhere you will find that the morning and the evening correspond in glory. Take Israel’s history. What a morning
{122}
they had. You see them coming out on that night which is to be much remembered throughout all their generations. As the morning comes they are there coming out of Egypt, not one feeble one in their tribes, keeping rank, coming out in power, leaving Egypt behind for ever. What marks them? Their hearts are filled with joy, at least those that God particularly had His eye on. God says, “I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals when thou wentest after me in the wilderness in a land that was not sown”. He was such to their heart that He drew them. “I drew them,” He says, “with cords of a man with bands of love,” and the people went out in the joy of the morning with God supreme in their hearts that is the outgoings of the morning for Israel, the Israel of God.
And so you come to their evening. What an evening -- they had the evening in Malachi. God looked down again, He saw the evening like the morning. There were those amongst that crooked nation, as they were publicly, upon whom God looked and He saw a blessed evening like the morning. He saw those that feared the Lord, whose hearts were filled with holy reverence for His blessed name, speaking to one another, speaking *often* to one another, and it says, “they thought”, not only spoke,
{123}
they thought on His name; His great and holy and glorious Name was before them, and “a book of remembrance was written”. It was so blessed and so joyous that a book was written about it. God has many books, but one is added in connection with this evening of Israel’s history so it says “a book of remembrance was written”. First of all it says, “the Lord hearkened and heard”. His wondrous ear was bent, as it were, listening to the conversation, and indeed to the thoughts, for He knows the thoughts as well as the words. The thoughts of this company in the evening of Israel’s history, “He hearkened and heard”. “They shall be mine ... in that day when I make up my jewels”. He would have them specially for Himself. Just like the beginning, “I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth”, and here it is in the evening. They shall be mine when I make up my treasure. He would see them also in the beginning of Luke. There they are, living wholly for God. What a company! The elements that God recognised in the early chapters of Luke, are in quality perhaps even choicer than the beginning of Israel’s history.
You think of Anna, an aged widow, a great age, there she is. She served God night and day in the temple. Night and day, never a moment of her life but God was the supreme
{124}
object of her heart, never a moment in her life that she could call her own, to use for herself, but wholly and entirely devoted, day and night, in the temple, in fasting and prayers, living exclusively for God. There was nothing better than that in Israel’s beginning. So that you see in regard to Israel’s history, while the public position, of course, was awful, the morning and the evening, the outgoings of them rejoice, because God made it so, “thou makest it.” God’s work would secure that in every dispensation, that the morning and the evening correspond.
Now I come to another period, to the morning of the life of Jesus, the morning of His sojourn on this earth. There was never a morning like that, not a cloud on the horizon. “Morning without clouds,” it says. What a wonderful morning. Zechariah knew it was coming in. He spoke by the Holy Spirit, and he said, “The dayspring from on high hath visited us”. The heavenly morning, the dayspring, the dawn of the new day had come, through the tender mercy of God, and what a blessed morning it was. What joy it brought. The outgoings of it brought joy into many hearts. The angel said, “Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people”, and the shepherds returned with great joy, having seen the morning of the
{125}
entrance of Jesus into this scene. Simeon could take Him up in his arms and he could delight in the morning. It says, “Then took he him up in his arms and blessed God and said Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word for mine eyes have seen thy salvation”. He had seen the morning, the blessed morning of heaven. “A light,” he said, “for the revelation of the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel”. He was ready to go. And Anna came in the same hour, and she praised God, she gave praise to the Lord as she saw the morning expressed in the Person of Jesus. Every available heart was filled with joy. Who was there? The Son of the Highest. I do not know any title I like better than that. The One who brings right down here on earth into living expression, all that is in the Highest, all that marks the One that is the Highest. That is a great name for one to get hold of. And all the thoughts of the heart and mind of the Highest come into living expression, in the Babe that was laid in a manger. What a bringing down of the pride that wants to be big in this world, that the Son of the Highest is found laid in the manger.
So that the morning brings great joy into many hearts. One is struck with the word that “to you is born this day ... a Saviour
{126}
which is Christ the Lord”. Unto you is *born* this day, it says, “*a Saviour*.” Do you say, Of course He would be a Saviour later on? No, it does not say that; the angels said the Saviour is there, that little Child is the Saviour, the Babe. There is in Him that which will save men from all that has come in, all the pride, self-importance, arrogance of this world. Today is the Saviour born. I know, of course, His work on the cross is essential for the salvation of our souls, for the foundation on which we shall stand for ever, but I would like to point out that it says, “unto you is born this day ... a Saviour”.
So the morning fills many a heart with gladness, many a heart, but what about the evening? It was a night of unutterable woe, a day of unfathomed sorrow, a day that broke the Lord’s heart. He said, “My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death”. Such was the last day, but notwithstanding in another sense the evening, the outgoings of that evening rejoiced. The evening of the Lord’s life also corresponded with the morning, in that its outgoings bring joy and gladness into many hearts, for He never alters, blessed be His name. See Him on the last day. How wonderfully He acts. I would suggest particularly to young believers that they would find profound education in taking
{127}
the four gospels and looking at the life and actions, and words of Jesus during the last day of His life. It would give you a sense of what days were His. Indeed, I do not think one would exaggerate to say that a thousand years of one man’s life would not equal what was in one day of the life of Jesus; if you took all that was of God in the life of Methuselah, who lived nearly a thousand years, and you measured it alongside one day of the life of Jesus, you would admit that the thousand years of Methuselah’s life was not equal to one day in the life of Jesus.
But to call attention to the evening, the joy that flows out of the evening of the life of Jesus here on earth. The darkness of man’s unfaithfulness may bring the sense of gloom to one’s heart, for it was the night in which He was betrayed, but the bright light of His faithful love turns the shadow of death into the morning. He took the water, the towel, and girded Himself and in that chapter it says, “having loved his own which were in the world he loved them unto the end”. The evening, the outgoings of the evening, bring to us a sense of the faithful love of Christ to the end. The end, dear brethren, is the extremity to which love can go. It is the point beyond which there is nothing, not another step can love take, that is the end. In sacrifice,
{128}
in service, in devotedness, in faithfulness, in steadfastness, there is not another step that could be taken, that is the end, and He loved His own to the end. The love expressed on that night, the outgoings of that evening, has brought the joy of His faithful love into millions of hearts, corresponding in that way with the morning. You see the Lord as the day closes. Peter takes a sword and smites the ear of the servant of the high priest. What will the Lord do in the evening? He will put the ear back. Think of that. There they are in their hatred coming out with swords and staves to take the Prince of Peace, and one of His servants, one of the servants of Christ removes a man’s ear! But the Lord touches his ear and puts it back. That man’s heart, if he had a heart, would overflow with joy that in the presence of the hatred and malice of the human heart, the love and mercy of Christ was still shining in all its preciousness.
There is Peter. What an evening it has been to him. Warming himself by the fire, with oaths and curses denying that he ever knew the Lord, denying that he knew what the maid was speaking about. What an evening! But there also is the evening of the life of Jesus, the outgoings of that blessed evening, which conveyed to Peter’s heart that while Peter had been unfaithful, while Peter had
{129}
denied the Lord, the Lord was not unfaithful. He cannot deny Himself and it says, “the Lord turned and looked upon Peter”. He conveyed to that erring disciple the unchanging love of His heart in that dark evening, and it filled Peter’s heart first with sorrow, but then with joy.
And there is the dying thief, in the evening, in the last few moments of the day, what are the outgoings of the evening there? That man, a witness of what man is in himself, of the hatred and darkness of his own heart, that could insult Christ in that evening; proves there in that evening the blessed grace of the heart of Jesus, as He says, “Father forgive them”. How he would be impressed with that. The Lord omitted none in His prayer. He did not say except Pilate, nor did He except those thieves that railed on Him. He said “*them*”, and the outgoings of the evening came into the heart of at least one, and filled him with eternal joy, fitting him for that scene of joy in heaven -- the paradise of God. So that the evening and the morning corresponded in that solemn but blessed day of the sojourn of Christ on earth.
And now, a word about the church. What a morning the assembly had! One loves the beginning of the Acts because it tells about the dawn of the assembly. It is like standing
{130}
towards the east and watching the sun come up; it gives you the same, sort of impression, beauty, majesty, splendour, the power of the sun -- that is the beginning in the Acts. The Lord looked down from heaven, in @Acts 9, upon one, Saul of Tarsus. He saw His own suffering in various parts of Judea and elsewhere, and He spoke to Saul indicating that that suffering company and Himself were one, not twain, but one. The Lord could see that on earth which was His body. “The church which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all”. He recognised it from heaven, and heaven never makes mistakes. Men make mistakes, what they said last year they find totally wrong this year, but heaven makes no mistakes, and the Lord’s voice from heaven said that the company Paul was persecuting was “*Me*”. It was His body, it expressed in life what He is. You look at the features of it. It was a heavenly company, it did not live on the earth morally, it lived in the upper room, above the atmosphere of this world, marked by wonderful variety, corresponding with all the work of God; for God never makes anything in a formal way, standardisation is not a part of God’s work, everything is marked by profound variety. There it was in the beginning united, which is always a feature of the work of God. The
{131}
heart and soul of all the believers were one, not only one doctrinally but one in heart and soul. There they were in unity and, marked by sacrifice, corresponding with Christ, not one of them called anything he had his own. You think of a condition like that. There was not one in that beginning, in that morning, that reckoned anything he had as his own.
We all have bodies, they are not our own, and if we have some time, that is not our own, and if we have a house, that is not our own, and if we have money that is not our own: whatever we have, it is to be held for the Lord, every bit. There they were in the beginning, a most wonderful morning, and the Lord recognised it. He said to Saul, “Why persecutest thou ME?” I do not know anything more wonderful than that in scripture. The Lord stands identified and inseparable from His church, His body, long before the doctrine of the thing was ever known, but the living organism was there before the doctrine of the assembly was given. It says of the husband and wife they are no longer twain, they are not two any more they are one. Paul says “this is a great mystery but I speak concerning Christ and the church”, and there it was in life in the morning of the assembly’s history.
{132}
What of the evening? Will it be different? Will the church be taken away because she has disgraced herself? We shall never have the rapture on such a line as that. Do you think God ever acts like that? Did He take Enoch because he was so disgraced that he was not fit to live? “He had this testimony that he pleased God”. And what about Elijah? Did Elijah go up because he was there under the juniper tree thinking he might as well die? God did not take him then. He took him when He would take him, because he was so delightful to Him, that He would have him and He would not leave him here any longer. He would take him because of his acceptability to God, and so, with the church at the end, the evening. It is going to end like it began with every moral feature of the beginning. The thing for you and me is to be in it, nothing else matters today. One would commend the word to all of us that nothing else matters today, but to be in the evening of the church’s history, to be in the outgoings of this blessed evening that the Lord is going to make, is making, thank God. The joy of the evening is going to be like the joy of the morning, but do not let any of us assume that we shall be inevitably in it. We shall be in it, if we are in it. So that what marks the evening is this, that the Spirit and the bride say “Come”.
{133}
One has been impressed lately with the remarkable character of a bride. I am speaking of the natural for the moment. If you think about it you will see it is a most remarkable thing. There is a woman, she loves her father and her mother, in any case that is what is normal, she loves her brothers and sisters each one, she loves her home and is quite happy in it, she loves her friends with whom she lives, in her surroundings she is quite happy, and yet when she is a bride this is what she says. “I have found an object for my heart: in the joy of which I am prepared to leave father and mother, to leave brothers and sisters, to leave home and friends, if necessary to leave the country, to be with the one I love”. It does not mean that she has ceased to love her kindred or her friends, but she says in being a bride, that she prefers her husband to them all. It may possibly be a sorrow to some of us to accept this, but that is the fact, that when she becomes a bride she says, “I prefer my husband to father, mother, brothers and sisters and friends”.
That is what the Spirit of God is seeking and is doing, that there should be on earth at the end, characteristically and livingly, those features. Christ has such a place that there is nothing else that holds the heart of the church.
{134}
That is what the Lord sees at the end. He saw that at the beginning did He not? I believe all the features of the upper room will come back. The desire to live really and truly in the sight of God above the moral elements of this world, in touch with heaven, the living unity of heart and soul being one, bound together in living affections all over the world, the readiness to sacrifice, so that anything we have is not our own: that is what the Lord is seeking, that is what He would do for all of us, if we would open our hearts to Him. That is the work of the Spirit to bring back livingly those features, that Christ should have such a place, that there is that on earth which corresponds with the bride, and indeed it is so. The Spirit and the bride say “Come”. The Spirit and the bride, standing together, the Spirit not ashamed of that which He has formed for Christ, but prepared to identify Himself with it definitely. The heart of the bride preferring Christ to everything that could be named, desiring to be His and for Him for ever. That is the evening, and the joy that the Lord would have marking it.
The outgoings of the evening rejoice. There is a joy springing up in many hearts, and the Lord wants to extend to each, His outgoings of the evening of the church’s history.
{135}
Well, just these few words as seeking to encourage our hearts to be in the evening that corresponds with the morning, in accordance with all the movements of God from the outset, for it must be so at the end of this dispensation as in the beginning.
{136}
CHOICE
@2 Peter 2: 1 - 6; @Psalm 78: 65 - 72; @Joshua 24: 14 - 15
I would like dear friends, to urge upon every one of you the great necessity at the present time of being definite in your acceptance of the Lord. Indefiniteness is one of Satan’s great weapons, perhaps his greatest, to prevent you getting the great gain of the present moment, the joys of heaven in your heart; for indefiniteness leads to indifference. Those who are not definite, generally become indifferent and indifference is a state that is obnoxious to God. The Lord says, “I would thou wert cold or hot”, @Revelation 3: 15. He would rather have people icy cold than to be lukewarm, to be indifferent. Now, I urge that you should today be definite and make your choice, for it is a matter of choosing, dear friends. Do not be like the king that Paul spoke to who said, “Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian”, @Acts 26: 28. He said, “Almost.” But the Apostle said, “I would ... that ... both almost and altogether” (verse 29), everyone that hears me, not only
{137}
Agrippa but everyone, were just like myself “except these bonds;” “such as I am,” he said. The Apostle was no half-hearted man, he was wholly and absolutely committed to the Lord. He could speak of “the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus *my* Lord”, @Philippians 3: 8. Plenty of people are quite willing to speak about our Lord, but Paul said “*my*.” Never mind who else is affected, he says, “He is mine:” There is nothing indefinite about the attitude of God or of heaven towards Christ, it is absolute.
The first scripture we read speaks of the Lord as “chosen of God.” You would agree that choice is a definite act, it is not something haphazard, it is a deliberate act, and God has chosen Jesus. I would like you to see clearly, that He had committed Himself entirely to that blessed Man and heaven endorses all that He has done. Heaven supports it. You find that at the coming of Jesus into this world. Nobody knows, I suppose, how many little babes were born that day. No doubt many were born on that very day, the day that the angel speaks of as “this day,” but heaven makes a selection out of all those babes, there is one Babe selected by heaven and by God. Nobody would have known where to find Him. Heaven must give direction, heaven must give a sign, for how are they to find Him
{138}
otherwise? They might have gone to Jerusalem or Rome or Athens, but the word from the angel says, “And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find *the* Babe,” there is only one that is in view at that moment, “wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger,” @Luke 2: 12. That is the One whom heaven selects, that God selects. Matthew in his gospel records that a star came and stood over the place where the little Child was. Wonderful thing to see that star! standing over the place where the little Child was. It filled the wise men’s heart with great joy when they saw it. There was nothing indefinite about them.
Now, if God is definite in choosing Christ, why are not you? You cannot be wrong if you are in line with heaven, can you? It must be right to be in line with heaven because heaven is very much greater than the earth. Heaven is God’s throne and the earth is His footstool. Heaven is God’s throne and heaven rules the earth. Perhaps you do not agree with that? Well, you try and lengthen the day, this very day; see if you can get anybody that can control the earth and order the day and the night. That is controlled from heaven. It says, “He made two great lights; the greater light to *rule* the day, and the lesser light to *rule* the night”, @Genesis 1: 16.
{139}
In the light of this, dear friends, can you understand the pride of men? Heaven has explicitly and definitely chosen Christ. He is the One that God selects. That is confirmed all through the life of Jesus. At the river Jordan you find it. All Jerusalem and Judea came out to the Jordan to be baptised of John. As Jesus was baptised the heavens were opened and heaven again confirmed its selection. God says of Him, “Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased,” @Luke 3: 22. That is the message that came out from that opened heaven and it was expressed in the selection of Christ, as the Man of God’s pleasure and the delight of His heart.
But there is another word from heaven on the mount of transfiguration. Things were more confined and concentrated there. Jesus, Peter, James, John, Moses and Elias, that is all; and Peter, not knowing what he said, would put Jesus and Moses and Elias together. He says, “Let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias,” @Luke 9: 33. That is what Christendom would do; they would not mind Jesus having a little place. Then heaven makes the selection again and a voice comes out of the cloud saying, “This is my beloved Son: hear him”, @Luke 9: 35. That is not indefinite,
{140}
is it? He is the One to listen to. You say, ‘Oh, I am too busy, I am listening to Socrates and the wise men of the day;’ but heaven says, “Hear him,” and heaven has never been known to make a mistake.
It says, “All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord,” @Psalm 145: 10. There is not one thing that God has done that is a mistake. Take a blade of grass, take a worm of the dust, take the sun, take yourself, take your own eye. There is not a mistake about that. Who made it? Was it an accident? Well, *we* do not get accidents like that. When men have accidents they do not get such results as God we do not do this sort of thing ourselves. What awful conditions man gets into when he has accidents! It is the folly of the human heart to talk like that -- and so we find that God confirms His thoughts again on the mount. He says, “Hear him.”
Now, you think of the Lord in another place, that is, in the grave, where there are far more persons buried than those alive on the earth. The human mind could not conceive how many persons are buried; and Jesus died. It says, “Christ died ... and ... was buried,” @1 Corinthians 15: 3, 4. His holy, precious body was laid in a new tomb, hewn out of a rock wherein no one was ever laid, but nevertheless He was buried and heaven makes
{141}
a selection, dear friends, and God brings into activity some of His reserves; He has got wonderful reserves. Men have no conception of what God has in the way of power. Elijah thought at one time that God’s power had spent itself, so God came down to the mount where Elijah was and let him see what He could do. He made a tempest come up and who could stop it? Then He made an earthquake. How completely everything could be altered by an earthquake; and then a fire. It says the elements will melt with fervent heat. These are all part of His reserves. Now God brings the greatest of His reserves into operation, what scripture calls “the surpassing greatness of His power,” @Ephesians 1: 19 N.T. There is one blessed Man who has gone into death, whose precious body has been buried and that mighty power operates in raising Him from the dead and setting Him at God’s own right hand, far above every principality and power and every name that is named. The power that took Jesus, that blessed One, from the grave and set Him on the throne of glory, was selective, it was deliberate. One might add a word or two as to His actually being taken to heaven.
He was with the disciples for forty days coming in and out among them, but the day
{142}
arrived for His departure and He led them out as far as to Bethany where Mary, Martha and Lazarus lived and they saw Him and it says, “he was taken up, they beholding him.”, @Acts 1: 9. N.T. Heaven put its arms down, God’s everlasting arms that could reach from heaven to earth; “strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand”, @Psalm 89: 13, and it is not shortened. The great arm of God came down from heaven and took Jesus up and left the others. He selected One to be taken to heaven at that moment.
Now, dear friends, why are you not definite? You say, ‘Well, I do not care about these things; I am neutral.’ You are not neutral, dear friend: in this matter of choice there is no neutrality. You have either chosen to serve the Devil or you have chosen to serve the Lord. Scripture makes it perfectly clear that there are two Gods; there is the god of this world that men worship behind ten thousand things and there is the living and true God, and there is no position in the middle anywhere. It is a lie of the Devil to think there is and you are either under the leadership of the One who is exalted at the right hand of God, a Prince and a Saviour, or you are under the leadership of the prince of this world. That is the being that leads this
{143}
world and you are either under his leadership or you are under the leadership of the One whom God sets forth a Prince and a Saviour. There is nothing in between. It is a deception of the enemy to think there is a path in between. How could there be?
Now, just a word or two further as to God’s choice, because I would like to encourage everyone to make a choice, to be definite about it. The psalm we read makes it clear that not only has God chosen Jesus whom the world rejected and set aside as worthless, but He has chosen the place on which He would meet you. It says that He chose “the mount Zion, which he loved. And he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth which he hath established for ever.” Mount Zion represents the sovereign mercy of God. God has chosen it deliberately, because He loves to speak to men on the principle of mercy. He is prepared to meet you now. You must admit that He has the right to choose how He will meet you. You must meet God, and if you postpone it while you are on earth it will not alter the fact that you must meet Him. If death comes in, then you meet Him at once, for it says, “then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it”, @Ecclesiastes 12: 7. How well, then, for you to
{144}
meet God now before you have to leave this earth where He would like to meet you because it says, “he chose ... the mount Zion which he loved.” He loves to meet men on the platform of mercy. He has set aside the principle of human responsibility as the meeting place and He has established the most magnificent place in the universe. “The joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion,” @Psalm 48: 2, an impregnable position where He is prepared to meet every one in mercy.
You see that principle working out when the blessed Lord Jesus was here. Men only had to cry out for mercy and how it opened His heart. Ten lepers could say, “Jesus, Master, have mercy on us,” @Luke 17: 13. It opened the flood-gates of His heart because it is the ground on which He loves to meet men. He healed the lepers, every one of them. He said, “Go, show yourselves unto the priests. And it came to pass, that, as they went, they were cleansed,” @Luke 17: 14. There was only one of them who came back to glorify God with a loud voice, but I want you to see that God is prepared to meet you there and He loves to meet you there. A blind beggar by the wayside in darkness, having lost everything, never expecting to ever get a ray of light, he heard that Jesus
{145}
passed by, Jesus of Nazareth, and he said, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me,” @Mark 10: 47. It says, “Jesus stood still,” @Mark 10: 49. He would not move from that point. He would wait and meet the blind beggar on mount Zion. The Lord says, “Two men went up into the temple to pray.” One of them said, “God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,” @Luke 18: 10 - 11. He was prepared to meet God on the basis of works which God had refused, and unless he judged that, he will meet God on the principle of his responsibility yet; but the other man, it says, “would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me the sinner;” verse 13, and the Lord says he went down “justified rather than the other”. Do you know what that word, ‘justified,’ means? It means that you are in the approval of God, not merely that you are forgiven or discharged. When a judge discharges a man it does not mean that he is justified, it only means that he is not convicted, but if the man was sent out justified with the approval of the judge, that would be a wonderful thing. This man went down justified because God loves to meet man there. It is the mount Zion that He loves. And so there is a man who is just about to meet God. He knew it, too. All the
{146}
teachings of the Sadducees did not weigh much when he came to face death, but there looms up before his heart this wonderful mountain. “The joy of the whole earth is mount Zion.” What a magnificent sight for a poor sinner to get a glimpse of! It appeared to the dying thief in the Person of Jesus: and he says, ‘I have lost everything; it is right that I should be judged, poor sinner that I am;’ but he turns to the Lord and asks Him for mercy. He puts himself entirely into the hands of Christ and the Lord loved him for it. He met him there at mount Zion.
He loves to meet you there. Why not come? I know very well, of course, it will mean the end of your pride. What we get on the principle of mercy does not exalt us, it humbles us, but it exalts God. It expands to you the magnificence of divine mercy so that “he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord,” @1 Corinthians 1: 31; @2 Corinthians 10: 17. That thief would not talk about himself and his own righteousness, he would be in accord with the psalm, which says, “Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion.” There the administration of the mercy and goodness of heaven takes place. Are you prepared to meet God there? Dear friend, come to mount Zion. Scripture speaks of those who asked the way to mount Zion. Turn
{147}
your steps now in the direction of mount Zion. The way to it is Jesus, the blessed Saviour, the One who can impart forgiveness of sins to you, it is preached to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
God delights in mercy. The only other spot where you could meet Him if you did not meet Him at Zion is at the great white throne. There you must stand before God on the ground of your responsibility to God and you will discover then, alas, that everything is “naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do,” @Hebrews 4: 13. “The books were opened;” @Revelation 20: 12, every act is known and it says, “The dead were judged out of the things written in the books.” Are you prepared, dear friend, to stand there and face your responsibility as a responsible being to God on the ground of your own action? I would again tell you there is no other meeting place than mount Zion which God has chosen but the great white throne. Will you not have to do with God in the place that He has chosen and selected? and He has a right to choose and to show mercy and that spot can never be challenged, for it says, “Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion,” @Psalm 2: 6, and while it is a mountain of mercy, it is a mountain of holiness as well. No creature could make that mountain. It is completely
{148}
of God. You just face it honestly. Could you or anyone else establish mercy to the guilty and maintain holiness? Could you show mercy and holiness together? Could anyone do it? Impossible! But God has established divine mercy on the principle of holiness and He says, ‘I will meet you there;’ and you say, ‘I won’t come.’ Have you, dear friend? Then you will stand before the great white throne and have to do with God in connection with your responsible history, every act of which is seen and known perfectly by God. The One who has seen everything in secret is the judge on the throne then, and are you prepared to stand before Him on that ground and reject mount Zion? Reject in your heart Jesus, the blessed Administrator of the mercy of God? I appeal to you, dear friend, to face it and recognise that there is no neutral position, there is not another meeting place. There is that mount Zion which He loves or there is the great white throne at the end and there is no other meeting place where you can have to do with God.
The world has made its choice. It is not indefinite. It has examined carefully the One whom God has chosen and it has given its judgment. It has declared that He is worthless. “Cast away indeed,” Peter says, “as worthless by men,” @1 Peter 2: 4. N.T. Do you
{149}
stand there, as rejecting the One that God has Himself chosen and selected, to be the foundation of His eternal glory? It says, “Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation,” @Isaiah 28: 16. One that God has chosen to be the corner stone to adorn the structure that He is building, to give character to it, of whom this world has definitely said that He is worthless. Have you reversed it? Have you, dear friend? You say, ‘I am neutral.’ That is Satan’s device to have you. The world was not neutral. They had on one side a thief and on the other side they had the greatest Giver, and they decided that they would have the thief. On one side they had a man that was marked by sedition and robbery and on the other side they had One who was obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, and they chose Barabbas. It says, “He was a notable prisoner,” @Matthew 27: 16. He was renowned in this world, and there was another blessed Man renowned in heaven, having a name above every other name, the name to which all the angels bow. They said, ‘We will have Barabbas.’ They selected one of these two, a murderer, who stained his hands with the blood of his fellow men. The other the Life-giver, the blessed One who could impart life to the souls and the
{150}
bodies of men and who had done so; they said of Him, “Not this man, but Barabbas,” @John 18: 40. You say, ‘I am neutral.’ God will refuse and judge you for your neutrality. Either your life is following the direction of the world, that is, of Barabbas, or you are committed definitely to the One whom God has chosen. Which is it? I beg you not to rest tonight before you answer that question before God. Am I in line with the world, and Barabbas, or have I accepted Jesus as my blessed Saviour and Lord, and had to do with God on the principle of absolute mercy, recognising that I have no rights of my own whatever; you will then be in keeping with heaven’s choice and God will then bless you and give you His Spirit to bind you to Christ for ever.
That is the position typically reached in Joshua. God said, “Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles¬ wings and brought you unto myself,” @Exodus 19: 4. Joshua puts this question to them which I would like to put to every soul of man. Are you going to have idols or are you going to have God? Will you have the idols that you had across the river, the gods of the Amorites, or will you have God? Joshua says, “Choose you this day whom ye will serve.” ‘Will you have idols to serve
{151}
or will you have God?’ You say, ‘I am not an idolater.’ Well, I am not so sure about that. There is more idolatry in Britain now than there was in the year 55 B.C. I know, of course, that men are not literally kneeling down before a piece of stone, but I would like to ask you, dear friend, what object governs your heart and life? What are you living for? What is it that holds your heart and life? Look into it. If it is not God it is an idol. With many it is money. Money is an idol today that millions are worshipping. With others it is pleasure. There never was such a day; everything must be sacrificed on the altar of pleasure. It is an idol: and so, dear friend, I would say to you, ‘Which will you have tonight? Will you continue to worship idols, or will you have the true God to fill your heart?’ He wants all of it. He is not satisfied with half of it. He says, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength,” @Mark 12: 30. That is what God wants. He wants every idol to be banished out of your heart, to get it all for Himself and He is worthy of it: no one else has a right to it. He says, “My son, give me thine heart,” I want it.
Joshua said, ‘Choose this day,’ he never
{152}
spoke about tomorrow. What can you say about tomorrow, dear friend? You may never see tomorrow. None of us know anything about tomorrow. We have today, God has given us this day, but tomorrow may never come. This is the day to decide. Joshua said, “As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord:” but to the others he says, “Choose you this day whom ye will serve.” Do not listen to the enemy’s suggestion of a more convenient season. There is no more convenient season. This is this day that the Lord gives you to decide. There are many living on earth who will never see tomorrow and the Lord is coming. In addition to that there is the great delusion coming. John says he saw a beast rising out of the sea, a great being that men will choose instead of God, a strong delusion, and you will be carried away by it if you reject Christ: but I would entreat every one to take the word of Joshua to heart and to make this day a day of choice to serve the Lord, that the Lord might be your Lord. As Mary Magdalene said, “They have taken away my Lord.” She says, so to speak, ‘He is mine:’ and you say the same, dear friend. “Choose you this day whom ye will serve.”
Christ Jesus is the choice of heaven, the choice of God: meet God at mount Zion which
{153}
He has chosen and loves, and definitely commit yourself to the Lord as your Lord. You will come under the conscious approval and acceptance of heaven, be filled with joy in your own heart and know the salvation which is in His blessed Name.
{154}
DIVINE PLEASURE IN EXPRESSION
@Genesis 22: 11 - 18; @Hosea 14: 1 - 7; @John 20: 14 - 18
It must be evident to anyone who is at all observant, that God finds pleasure in the expression of things, an expression which conveys something that is according to His mind, otherwise there is no answer to the wonderful fact that He has moved, from what we might call -- for want of a better word -- an uncreated sphere where He dwells in light unapproachable. That is a wonderful thing.
There was a moment when creation came into existence. The heavens are as much part of creation as the earth -- all of them -- scripture speaks of three, and then speaks of all the heavens, not revealing how many there are, but the heavens were created and the earth was created, God, as the Creator, choosing to bring into existence a creation. What for? We could not attempt, of course, to answer that fully; no one knows fully; but it is quite evident that God found His pleasure in it. That is an answer that we can give; the elders give it, and the elders know.
{155}
It was said to one of the elders, “Sir, thou knowest”, and the elders say, “for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created,” @Revelation 4: 11 -- all “the heavens, the earth, the sea, and all that in them is,” @Acts 4: 24, as said the saints of the early church. “For thy pleasure they are and were created”, God finding His pleasure in having in His creation something that would express what He was, some feature of Himself. His pleasure evidently is to express Himself.
So God created the heavens. Of what do the heavens speak? They speak of height; “the heavens for height”, it says. In what He created God would indicate the thought of elevation. As far as our minds are concerned the height of the heavens is infinite; we cannot compass the height of the heavens. It says, “The heavens for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of kings is unsearchable”, @Proverbs 25: 3. Then God made two great lights. God found His pleasure to express in vessels of light that feature of Himself, so that when we look at the sun or the moon or the stars God would convey to us an impression that He is “light”. Light is a characteristic of God. “God is light, and in him is no darkness at all” @1 John 1: 5. I believe that works out in everything He
{156}
made. You find in scripture an immense variety of things used to tell us about God, and if we had eyes to see, everything that He has created would speak of God.
God uses the lion; He made the lion to speak of Himself, to convey to us this characteristic of God that He never turns back. The lion does not know anything about turning back. That is a reflection of God; God expresses in the lion that characteristic of Himself that He never turns back.
He made behemoth. “Behold now behemoth”, He says to Job (@Job 40: 15). The only thought we have of behemoth is a hippopotamus; God made behemoth, to express in a creature some little conception of His own strength, the strength that is in the creature speaking of the strength of God, the Almighty God.
God made the ant. “Go to the ant”, He says (@Proverbs 6: 6). What do you learn about God in the ant? Wisdom and resourcefulness. God made it, though so small, to express His wisdom.
He made the rivers and the fountains of waters, to convey to us that He is the fountain of living waters. Lately one has been enjoying this humbling feature that there is not a man on earth that can make one drop of water. Think of the ocean, the rivers,
{157}
the springs that run out of the hills, think of the rain -- all the men on earth combined could not make one drop of water. God is telling us, you see, that He is the source of living refreshment; He conveys it to us in the fountains, springs, rivers, the rain, the dew, and so on, in all creation.
The Lord Himself said, “Consider the lilies”. God made the lily. Nobody else could make a lily; The Lord says, “Consider the lilies”. We learn in them how God loves to have everything beautiful; He loves to see things clothed beautifully. Why did He make the lily if it were not so? And that idea runs through. I believe a good deal is only for the eye of God, because in tropical seas, if you could go down to the bottom of the ocean, there is beauty there. What is it for? “All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord”, @Psalm 145: 10; every one of them speaks of God. Many things have been corrupted by sin, but they were made to speak about God.
But one does not want to deal with creation merely, but that we might see how God desires to have things expressed, not simply that we have them in the mind, abstractly, as alas is so with many of us; but God wants them expressed. I do not think He would have created the universe if He did not want things expressed.
{158}
So God said, “Let us make man in our image”; He would have a living man on earth to represent Him, so that as the lower creation saw Adam they recognised something of God. He would have representation on earth, and God made man with that in view. To represent Him in quite a different way from behemoth or the lily; and so you find that running right through scripture. God said, “Let them make me a sanctuary”; a structure that would express what was in His mind, and He took Moses up to the mount to show him the pattern of the things in the heavens, so that he could build on earth what would express God’s mind.
How perfectly it all came out in Christ! God brought in that supremely wondrous vessel -- “a body hast thou prepared me” -- for the expression of all that He is. There is nothing partial in Christ. We see a ray, a glimpse of the Creator in the ant, a feature in the lily, one or two characteristics in the sun, but when you come to Jesus, all that God is and that He desires to express, He has expressed in its fulness in that blessed Man. If it is beauty, it is seen there, and you cannot name a single feature in the universe of God but you can find it perfectly in Christ, not one. Start from the bottom of the ocean and go up far above all heavens, you will not be able
{159}
to locate a single feature, characteristic of God, but what you will find it set forth perfectly in Christ.
Then you have a city “whose builder and maker is God”, @Hebrews 11: 10. God builds a city, so that His glory might shine out in it. John says that he saw “the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God”, @Revelation 21: 10, 11. Her shining expresses the glory of God. Out from that vessel, shine the rays of the divine glory, as in none other except Christ. Then, believers, you and I, are vessels -- “vessels of mercy”, says the apostle, “which he had before prepared for glory”, @Romans 9: 23, and our bodies temples of the Holy Spirit (@1 Corinthians 6: 19). God looks upon each of His own as a vessel in which He would express livingly what is of Himself. What a wondrous dignity!
Now, it was just that that I wanted to touch upon in these scriptures, to encourage our hearts to make room for the expression of things, not merely to have them as thoughts or desires. I think you will see from what I have said, that God finds great pleasure in things being expressed. So that Abraham has to do with God who knows the thoughts and intents of the heart, who can divide between a thought and an intent. I do not
{160}
know that you and I can do that often, if at all, but God can look into every man’s heart and dissect a thought from an intent. God says to Abraham, “Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of”.
Why should God say that, seeing He looks into Abraham’s heart and knows what he thinks? God wants things expressed, not merely thought; He wants to see the thing. I do not understand why He created anything if it is not for that. It would appear that God finds pleasure in seeing the thing expressed. So Abraham takes Isaac and binds him on the altar, and takes the knife to slay his son, and after that you get what is seldom done -- God speaking from heaven and repeating a man’s name. God said, “Abraham, Abraham!” That is not often done. It indicates always that the one who is named twice comes particularly under the notice of the Lord. It is the evidence of peculiar interest in the person that is named. God says, “Abraham, Abraham!” and then He says, “Because thou hast done this”, not thought it, not held it in the mind abstractly, but “because thou hast done this, and hast not withheld thy son,
{161}
thine only son, I will richly bless thee, and greatly multiply thy seed, as the stars of heaven, and as the sand that is on the seashore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth bless themselves”. But it was “because thou hast *done* this”.
You will find when men do things that please God He always has something to say that indicates how delightful it is to His own heart; for Abraham had portrayed in a living way just exactly the attitude and the blessed work of God, what God would do in Christ. He that “spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all” had been portrayed in life for the pleasure of God -- and God said, “because thou hast *done* this”. God wants things done, He does not want them thought merely, and He finds peculiar pleasure in seeing them done, particularly on the line of sacrifice. The apostle Paul indicates that to the Corinthians. He had been boasting about them, how willing they were to sacrifice and that they were “ready a year ago”, but then he tells them that he thought it necessary to send two of his companions so that they should not only be willing but that they should do it. That is what God wants; He wants it done.
{162}
We all believe in sacrifice abstractly; I mean, the thought of sacrifice is no strange thought to us. We read of it and think of it and remember it; it is a theme that is constantly before us, and I am thankful to say that one observes in the hearts of the brethren more than ever that they are willing, but the Lord wants it done. So the Apostle says, Now then, do it, not think it, not be willing only, but do it. And God will have something to say peculiarly to those who do it. I am sure it is the time for sacrifice at the end. It was so at the beginning.
It says of Barnabas amongst others that he “having land, sold it”. He not only thinks it, not only was he willing, but it says he sold it and laid the proceeds at the Apostles¬ feet, and they gave him a name “son of consolation”; the thing was done. One would encourage us, dear brethren, to do the things, and God will give His approval in a peculiar way. If there is a brother or sister anywhere to whom God can say, as it were, “Abraham, Abraham!” as seeing he or she is doing it, we will all get the gain of it. All the nations of the earth will get the gain of Abraham’s act. “In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed”, and so, every true element of sacrifice -- the act, not the word or thought
{163}
will bring great gain amongst the saints everywhere.
Now I wanted just to add a word or two in connection with the other two passages. The Spirit of God, through Hosea, says to the people, as conscious of their departure, “Take with you words, and turn to Jehovah; say unto him, Forgive all iniquity, and receive us graciously; so will we render the calves of our lips”. Why should we say that? God can see what is in our hearts. God wants to hear it; you may say you *think* it, well, but God wants to *hear* it. It says, “Take with you *words*” -- not thoughts -- “and turn to Jehovah; say unto him, Forgive all iniquity, and receive us graciously”. I believe a great many difficulties in local meetings would clear up if we would say things. We are often quite content to think them, but God’s blessing comes in when the things are said, whether it be to God or to one another. I cannot exactly tell you why God wants it said. I know amongst one another there is a great deal of difference between thinking a thing and saying it, and if an acknowledgment of wrong doing is due on the part of any, the word from God is, “Take with you *words*” and say it, and God will come in. What a lot He has to say after that! What He would be to Israel when they had said it, when they had rendered this
{164}
acknowledgment! He says, “I will be as the dew unto Israel “. He would come in and bless them and give them the features of the cedar and the vine and the influence of the dew in their hearts. So, as enjoying the forgiveness and being received graciously, what follows is, “so will we render the calves of our lips”. That is a remarkable expression. God wants the “calves of our lips”. The idea, of course, is sacrifice, and indeed the Apostle makes it clear. He says, “By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise continually to God, that is, the fruit of the lips confessing his name”, @Hebrews 13: 15.
Now, there would not be any difficulty in hiving off if that were recognised. One hears of meetings with one hundred, one hundred and fifty, and even two hundred, and they say we have not the power for two meetings. Why? Because there are those to whom this has never appealed. That is why. God wants the “calves of our lips”. You say, I praise in my heart, but He wants the sacrifice of praise as the fruit of our lips. One would appeal affectionately to brothers who are silent, that God wants what is in your heart expressed. The thing is not complete without it. One longs that this should come into your heart, that God finds great pleasure in the calves of the lips being sacrificed to Him. Now,
{165}
if there are forty, or thirty, or twenty brothers and every one of them brings this sacrifice we would not speak about not having power. Here are forty brothers in a place, every one of them coming on the Lord’s Day morning prepared in their hearts to present the calves of their lips. There is the prayer meeting, and forty are present, every one lifting up holy hands in prayer to God. What delight to God! That is what He wants. He does not want it simply to be abstract; He delights in having it expressed. It is clear from the universe that He loves the expression of His own work. And so, in the assembly He wants every brother to bring the calves of his lips, the sacrifice of praise, the fruit of our lips. The Apostle does not say the fruit of our minds or our thoughts, but the fruit of our lips. It would not be long before a meeting of one hundred and fifty would divide into two, or probably three, if all the brothers saw this and made room for it in their hearts and brought their tribute, the sacrifice of praise, the fruit of their lips confessing His name; and God will have something to say. I am assured He would bless us as He did Abraham and as He did in Hosea. He would make the dew to come down and make the vine to flourish and the cedar of Lebanon.
Now, I just wanted to confirm that from one or two other passages, particularly the one I
{166}
read in John. There is Mary standing at the sepulchre weeping, with wondrous holy thoughts of Christ and deep affections for His blessed Person going through her heart. What He was to her! She is weeping, and the Lord is there, but not recognised for the moment by Mary. You say He could look into her heart. So He could; as it says in @Luke 9, “perceiving the thought of their heart”; every thought is perceived. Well, you say, is not that enough? No, it is not enough for God; it is not enough for the Lord. He knows exactly what Mary is thinking as she stands weeping, but He says to her, “Woman, why dost thou weep? whom seekest thou?” You say, He knows what she wants and why she is weeping. Yes! but He wants to hear it. It is manifest He wants the calves of her lips, He wants what is in her heart expressed. She says, “Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away”. The Lord wanted to hear that, and He drew it out of her. Nothing would gratify His heart so much as hearing it, and when He hears it, He says, “Mary”. She, like Abraham, comes under the personal recognition of Christ; the fruit of her lips has been offered. You say, It was not very intelligent. That is not the point. The Lord drew that statement out of her
{167}
heart; He wanted to hear it, and when He heard it He recognised her and conveyed to her heart that she was personally known to Him -- “Mary”.
And then He conveys to her the light of those heavenly and eternal relationships which He has secured for His brethren; He gives it to her. If He finds expressed from us, not only in heart but with our lips, what ministers to His heart, then He is free to speak to us. That is what the Supper is for. You come in and sit down in the presence of the emblems. The Lord would use them to draw out of our hearts the expression of what is there so that He can hear it, not only that it should be there, but for Him to hear. Surely we desire to minister to Him. I believe, if the brothers particularly would wake up to these wonderful privileges the Lord would have something very wonderful to say to us all. Do not wait until our contributions are marked by profound intelligence; let them be expressed; bring the calves of our lips, the sacrifice of praise continually.
You see it in many other scriptures. Think of the occasion when the Lord had His own around Him, looking again into every heart, and He says to them, “Who do men say that I the Son of man am?” not, who do they think? but, who do they *say*? And then He
{168}
says, “But ye, who do ye say that I am?” Peter says, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God”. He *said* it; he not only thought it, but he said it. That is why the Lord asked. That He might hear expressed what was in their hearts, and He says, “Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens. And *I* also, I say unto thee ... .” See how He personally addresses Peter, having heard what Peter had to say. He said, “I say unto thee that thou art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly, and hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it”. What a lot He has to say when Peter, on behalf of them all, expresses what is in his heart as to Christ.
You have this confirmed in a most touching way in @Luke 24. There are the two going to Emmaus, and the Lord draws near and says, “What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another, as, ye walk, and are sad?” And they say, “Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days?” And He says, “What things?” And they tell Him, “Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people: and how the chief priests and our rulers
{169}
delivered him to be condemned to death, and have crucified him. But we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel: and beside all this, today is the third day ... .” They opened out to Him just what they were thinking. Sometimes we are ashamed to say what is in our hearts because we fear it may need a little adjustment, and therefore we do not say it. But the Lord wanted to hear it. He said to them, “What things?” What are you thinking about? I believe the Lord would help us if we would say it. Those two erring ones were quite prepared to be adjusted. Indeed, the Lord says, “O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken: ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?” And then, “beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself”, and their hearts burned within them as He talked with them. If they had refused to say anything they would never have got that. If they had just been prepared to be quiet and to be onlookers, just those who stand by and let someone else do all the speaking, see what they would have missed. These wonderful unfoldings of Christ from the scriptures came out from those two telling the Lord what was in their
{170}
hearts; He made their hearts burn within them.
Now, I think you will see that these things have in view the expression of the work of God in whatever measure it has taken shape in our hearts. It was feeble enough, as we would say, perhaps, in @Luke 24. But, whatever the measure of the work of God in our hearts, the Lord wants the thing expressed, and He wants the fruit of our lips, “the calves of our lips”, as Hosea says, rendered to Him, and if He gets that it will be followed by His having something to say. It will be followed by His opening up to our hearts the necessary adjustment, and, it may be, further light as to His blessed Person, and the unfolding of the great thoughts of God as to the assembly against which the gates of hades cannot prevail. It all comes out on our side through being prepared to express what is the work of God in our hearts, whatever the measure.
One would just desire in speaking of the thing to encourage the brothers particularly, and all of us, to be available in sacrifice, as Abraham was and as the early believers were. Do not look at it as a beautiful picture, but do it, and God will have something to say. “Because thou hast done this ... in blessing I will bless thee”. And then “the sacrifice of praise continually to God, that is, the
{171}
fruit of the lips confessing his name”. He wants it rendered; He would come before our hearts to draw it out so that it might be heard, and it will be followed by an unfolding of blessed light of His glory to our hearts. May the Lord encourage us.
{172}
GOD’S FOOTSTOOL
@1 Chronicles 28: 1 - 3; @1 Chronicles 29: 1 - 9
I wish with the Lord’s help, to speak of God having a footstool here on earth. One feels that there is something very attractive in the words of David, “As for me I had in mine heart to build an house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and for the *footstool* of our God.” I know; of course, that it was also the house of God and the temple, the dwelling place for God here, but he says as well, that it was to be a footstool for our God, and that is the thought in my mind.
When God created the heavens and the earth, He intended the heavens to be His throne in the mediatorial sphere, the place where He sits in government as King eternal; and what a throne that is! He says “Heaven is my throne”. How little we know physically and materially about heaven. It is infinitely greater than anything on earth. There is as much difference between heaven and earth as there is between a throne and a footstool. David had a great sense of God, he speaks of God with reverence and adoration. I believe
{173}
God desires to have a greater appreciation of Himself from our hearts. David had his own greatness, he was a king on the earth, and had made all countries round about him tributary, under his control; but he lifts up his eyes to heaven and says, “Thine, O Lord, is the greatness and the power and the glory, and the victory and the majesty,  ... thou are exalted as head above all”.
David also says of God, that He clothes Himself with light as with a garment, and spreads out the heavens as a curtain (a tent curtain), the clouds are His chariot, He walks on the wings of the wind and He sets the pillars of His upper chambers in the waters. There are upper chambers in heaven. The Spirit of God speaks of them in the plural. He is God, and His throne is in heaven, and, carrying on that thought in @Revelation 4, we are told that the throne is set in heaven and that One sat on it.
He is the King eternal, He sits on the throne, and around the throne were twenty-four other subsidiary thrones, taking all their direction and control from the throne of God. Around the throne and in the midst of the throne were four living creatures; and seven lamps burnt before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God. There was also a rainbow like an emerald round the throne, and from
{174}
the throne there proceeded lightning, voices and thunder. It is a vision of the wonderful throne of God. And in the midst of the throne was a Lamb as it had been slain. Ezekiel speaks of this throne and sees a Man above upon it (@Ezekiel 1: 26) -- the Man Christ Jesus.
David desired that there should be on earth a footstool for our God, for this is why God made the earth at the beginning, to have a footstool where His feet could rest. We know little or nothing about it! There came a time after the creation of the earth, when it was said the earth was empty and waste. There was not a living thing on the earth, it was barren. The living God could not find a footstool for His feet in an empty waste earth! So He proceeded to fill the earth. He filled the earth with living things. He said to Adam, “Be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth”. It was to be His footstool; but instead of finding a footstool for His blessed feet, a condition arose through sin which grieved Him in His heart that He had ever made man on the earth. Later on He was grieved with the children of Israel -- His chosen people on earth. He could not find in them His footstool.
Now the Lord Himself provided an answer to all that. I would not speak of Him as representing the thought of the footstool of
{175}
God, for while He was on earth He was also in heaven, “the Son of man who is in heaven”, @John 3: 13; nevertheless how perfectly He ministered to the rest of God as a blessed Man on earth, so that the Holy Spirit descends as a dove and remains on Him. The dove was a symbol of rest, looking for a place for the sole of its foot and finding an eternal resting place there.
One desires to look into these scriptures, which indicate to us the kind of materials that make a footstool for God, having in mind particularly that every thought of God which refers to the assembly universally, can be worked out locally. You will find this is true. There is not one feature that belongs to the assembly in general, but is to find its expression locally. The house of God, which is the church of the living God, is also found in local expression, so that you have the church of God in Corinth. You have not only the church in its wide character, but you have also the same features in a locality, “the body of Christ.” This applies to all Christians, “by one Spirit are we all baptised into one body,” and that body is for the expression of Christ. The Apostle says “Ye are the body of Christ”, and “Know ye not that ye are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?” All this is said to the church at Corinth.
{176}
God would have a footstool in every city. We would all desire that there should be a footstool for God, for His blessed feet, that He may find rest on earth, pending the day when the whole earth will be His footstool. The whole earth will then be under the sway of Christ “from the river unto the ends of the earth”, @Psalm 72. One would like to commend this to our hearts. David said to all present, “who then is willing to consecrate his service this day unto the Lord?” I believe God is making His people willing today. “Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power”, and God is making us willing now to provide positive living material for the footstool of God.
David indicates what would be suitable for the footstool of God, for anything would not do. Nothing would do that was not in accord with the throne, that would not be consistent with His majesty. He is King of kings, the King eternal, and He desires to have a footstool on earth; what material would He have? The Spirit of God confided to David what material was suitable for the footstool of God.
Gold is the first material. God’s blessed feet could not rest on anything in which the gold was lacking. What kind of gold? Not any gold, not Egypt’s gold. The kind of gold God
{177}
uses is such as this earth has never seen. Nobody has ever seen gold as “transparent glass”. There is no such thing in the world. That is the kind of gold that must come into His footstool. It is “love out of a pure heart”, love that has not one single impure motive in it. This is the sort of material for His footstool. It is love towards Himself and towards one another. As God indicated at the outset, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart”; love out of a pure heart, that has no other object but Himself. The Apostle says also, “By love serve one another.” What for? If to get a name for oneself, then you provide no material for the footstool. Love is the gold that God uses. What a wonderful thing to have some of that in our localities. What God wants is gold like transparent glass. A love that springs from what He Himself is. He wants that kind of love from the hearts of His own in every place.
Then there is silver. What an enormous amount of silver was needed to make the footstool. Why is that? It is the recognition that we have been redeemed. Silver speaks of redemption; it is the acknowledgment that we have been redeemed. Do we all acknowledge that? -- There would be no will at work anywhere if we recognised that we are the property of the Lord. He has bought us,
{178}
redeemed us, we are His. If we recognise that there will be no self-will. There is no self-will in the footstool of God; if there had been God could not put His blessed feet on it. We have ceased to do as we like, for the silver is there in such abundance. As redeemed, we are at the disposal of the Lord, to do as He likes -- a blessed feature in His footstool.
Then we get brass -- brass in enormous quantities, to make His footstool. Brass can stand the fire of God’s holy judgment. “Our God is a consuming fire.” The brass can be where the fire is. Before His throne there are those living creatures that cease not day or night to say, “Holy, holy, holy”. One character of God is His infinite holiness. Now David recognised that God must have brass for His footstool. There is judgment of evil, of anything that does not correspond with the holiness of God. Evil is judged; it is rejected as God rejected it, and condemned as God condemned it.
Now we come to iron. The quantity of iron was wonderful. Very little else but gold was seen in the temple. What was to be done with all this iron? It was for nails. What are nails for? The footstool is made up of many parts, but it is one footstool, and therefore there must be many nails, the structure must
{179}
be held together at every point. There must be many nails. Do you want to disturb the footstool? To disturb the blessed rest of God by bringing in your own will and your own thoughts? David says we must have nails. The footstool must be held together in strength and power. Iron speaks thus of strength to hold all together in unity. The footstool must be one -- locally or generally.
Then he says wood. Wood for things of wood. One loves the thought of the wood. It is a great joy to see the wood. For this is a great feature in the material that David gathered up. He gathered up cedar trees innumerable. You could not count these great trees. What is this great tree -- the kind of cedar that goes into God’s footstool? It is true greatness in men. The cedar tree is the truly great man or woman -- brothers and sisters who are marked by true greatness in the sight of God. David got a great number of them, they all came into the footstool. What is the mark of a great man? He is ready to serve anyone. “He that is greatest,” said the Lord, “shall be your servant.” The biggest cedar is one who is prepared to serve all, great and small, rich and poor, wise and unintelligent; the cedar is ready to serve anybody. David got as many cedars as he could, indeed innumerable. Such would
{180}
minister to God’s pleasure. They are brothers and sisters who serve one another, who serve all. True greatness in men is seen in the service of one to another without favouritism. The cedar does not have any favourites. Nothing disturbs the footstool like having special friends. The cedar is the servant of *all*.
Then there were the fir-trees. What a splendid tree that is! They all were for the footstool. Where that timber came from the trees were always green. What a refreshment they are! We can be like fir trees, always fresh and living. The same in prosperity as in adversity, in joy and sorrow. God can find His pleasure, His rest where such a feature exists.
Then there is the olive tree, to form part of the footstool. The olive wood speaks of spiritual men and women. You cannot have the footstool without olive wood. Thank God they are here! They are found in the footstool of God. Spiritual persons. What marks a spiritual man is that he never trusts his own heart. As the Apostle says, “Ye which are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness considering thyself”. The olive wood goes into God’s footstool that His blessed feet may rest here. No footstool can be complete without olive wood. How much we owe to it!
{181}
Then the onyx stones. What marks the onyx stone? You can engrave upon it the names of the people of God. It is the kind of stone that will stand engraving and what is impressed remains there. Some stones would break to pieces if you engraved them, but on the onyx you can write the names of the people of God. The high priest carried this stone on the breastplate and on his shoulders. This is a feature of great value for the footstool. Brothers and sisters who carry livingly the names of the saints on their hearts in prayer to God. Not only generally but individually. Paul’s prayers are wonderful. He prayed night and day for Timothy, night and day for Philemon, and continually for the assemblies he had visited and for those he had not; he was in combat, and for those who had not seen his face in the flesh. Brothers and sisters who do not speak against one another but pray for one another. I would encourage all to take on the character of the onyx.
Then there are glistering stones and of divers colours. They all come into this wonderful footstool. Solomon’s footstool was wonderful and made of gold, but it did not come up to this. This is a footstool for our God. Each of these stones has received and retains a colour. What colours! There is the emerald, the ruby, the amethyst, and the sapphire. One
{182}
cannot speak of them all, but they represent the expression of divine glory. Blue speaks of the character of God. What a wonderful stone a sapphire is to place in the footstool. Some brothers and sisters always express the blue whatever happens. They love you the same even if you speak against them. They are not affected at all by what others think of them, they are like God who “sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust”. They are not occupied with what they get for themselves, they are simply expressing the blue of heaven. How little one knows of the blue! Then the emerald speaks of what is living. The green shines out under all conditions. Then the sardius or the ruby, glistening red. The red of the ruby is true greatness in men. It is seen in the ram’s skins dyed red. God loves that, and would have it in His footstool. All these divers colours seen in the glistering stones are rays of precious light emanating from Christ.
Marble is that which speaks of stability. There is nothing stronger and more stable than marble. We think of the Lord, how stable was His blessed walk through this scene! John looked at Him as He walked, His legs as pillars of marble. David gathered marble in great abundance, speaking of stability. It is those who are not moved by every wind of doctrine,
{183}
but steadily seeking only God’s will. Unmoved by what is going on, providing marble for the footstool of our God.
David finished outlining what was required for the footstool of God and then called upon all who were willing of the people to contribute to the great work. Only the willing come into this. If we contribute to the tinsel of this world we do not listen to David. We are not obliged to offer. God loves a cheerful giver. Could there be anything more blessed than to provide a little of the material for God’s footstool?
While the condition of the world and the professing church in its outward character gets worse and worse, let us seek to provide a special place where the blessed feet of God can find a resting place. The Lord encourage us on this line.
{184}
BLESSING
@Luke 2: 27 - 28; @Romans 9:5; @Ephesians 1: 3; @Genesis 22: 15 - 19
I am encouraged to feel that it is a matter of joy to our hearts to think of the Lord, ere He left the earth, being able to find here that which He could bless, that which He could speak well of. When we think of what else He found, particularly in Jerusalem, the city of the great King, His own city. As He beheld it, He wept over it -- “If thou hadst known, even thou, the things that belong to thy peace!” Then, He found hatred in the hearts of men. The Lord could say at the end, “they have both seen and hated both me and my Father”; so that in the language of the Psalm, He says, “They hated me without a cause”. Touching words -- without a cause. What cause was there? Could anyone suggest why Jesus should be hated? I wonder if I am speaking to one who hates Him? Render your cause, dear friend. Where is it? “Them that were my enemies wrongfully”. The Lord never gave occasion for anyone to be His enemy. Why are you His enemy, if you be here? As the
{185}
Lord said to Saul of Tarsus, “Why persecutest thou me?” What could Saul say? There was never a reason. No one could give a reason for rejecting Christ and being His enemy. So that it is a great joy to think of the Lord, ere He left this scene, finding that which He could bless.
As He looked around on that company at Bethany, there was Martha; Jesus loved Martha -- not compassionately merely, but complacently. As the Lord considered Martha He blessed. There is one that He could speak well of -- a beloved woman that is prepared to serve Him. How Martha served! There is Mary. The Lord could bless as He thought of Mary. It was that Mary, the Spirit of God says, anxious that no one should confuse her with any other Mary -- it was that Mary that anointed His feet with ointment and wiped them with the hairs of her head. That was the Mary that was at Bethany. And Lazarus. The Lord could bless as He thought of Lazarus. There was one that He could speak well of. Jesus loved Lazarus. “Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister and Lazarus”. Our friend Lazarus, He said. The Lord loves His friends -- He died for His friends. There is nothing He would not do for His friends. The disciples said, “the Jews of late sought to stone thee, and goest thou thither again?” The
{186}
Lord was going to His friend. “I go that I may awake him out of sleep”. And Thomas says, “Let us also go, that we may die with him”. Thomas thought -- He is going there to die, and we will go and die with Him -- but He would die for His friends. The Lord finds such delight in His friends that He would die for them. Well these are the elements of Bethany. It was to that spot the Lord led His own, indicating that He would like them all to be there under the influence of those living features, but I trust the Lord might help us as to blessing on our side.
We love, of course, to think of what the Lord can bless here, but then there is the answer to this on our side. We have many and great themes for blessing, themes for eulogy, themes to speak well of, of which our hearts should never weary. There is nothing that we would care to say much about in this world. There is not that which you can speak of in the nature of blessing. Some build up their hopes on things in relation to this world, but these scriptures bring before us causes of blessing that we can look into without any hesitation.
The first is, that Simeon took the Child Jesus “up in his arms”. He received Him into his arms -- He *received* Him. Evidently Mary instinctively recognised that Simeon was a suitable person into whose arms to place that
{187}
blessed One. He received Him, and, as he did so, it says, he “blessed God.” As Simeon looked on that little Babe he blessed God -- he spoke of God. In the light of that blessed Babe, God was so great to his heart that he could bless Him. He could speak of God in terms of eulogy. How rightly!
What did he see in that Babe? It says that “it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost that he should not see death before he had seen the Lord’s Christ.” I do not know whether that presents anything distinct to our hearts. I am sure it does to many believers, but it was revealed to him that he should not see death until he had seen the Lord’s Christ. What unfolded itself to Simeon’s heart in the thought of the Lord’s Christ? Christ, as we know, means anointed. God finds His delight in the Man that He has approved -- the One in whom all the pleasure of God is expressed. Simeon saw Him at that moment. He saw the blessed One in whom everything that was in the mind of God to have in man found its living expression -- the Lord’s Christ. Christ is a wonderful name. It says, “the head of every man is Christ”. You think of One great enough and worthy to be Head of every man. In that passage it is distinct from the woman. He is also the head of the body, the assembly -- God
{188}
wrought, it says, “in Christ when he raised him from the dead ... and gave him to be head over all things to the church, which is his body”. Christ is such a glorious Man, of such excellence and worth that He can give character to all things. All this and more lies behind “the Lord’s Christ.”
Then Simeon continues developing what led him to bless God. He says, “mine eyes have seen thy salvation”. He was looking at the salvation of God. No wonder He blessed! For God had brought in His salvation. There is nothing like unto God’s salvation. If God brings in salvation we know how perfect it must be. Men are trying to save themselves from the depression and the ruin that is rapidly spreading over the world, but they cannot find a saviour, but God has brought in a Man as salvation, and in the light of that Simeon blessed God. Then, to proceed, there is a light for the revelation of the gentiles. God has brought in a light in that blessed Babe that will bring to light the gentiles for God. Light no longer confined to one nation, but to bring out the gentiles for God, as it has done indeed, as most of us are the proof. So he blessed God as he thought of the gentiles being secured for God, and of Christ as the glory of God’s people Israel. The climax of Israel’s position as called of God is that
{189}
Christ is “the glory of thy people Israel”. When we think of Israel we think of Christ. As Simeon looked at Jesus he blessed God.
How well God may be spoken of in the light of His Christ -- His salvation -- that brings to light the gentiles for God -- the glory of Israel. You say, How did he come to see all that, for he was looking at a little Babe? How do you think we get light as to Christ in our souls, dear friend? Oh, say some, we go to the university and the theological colleges for that. Do you? Well, Simeon did not go there. Where do you go? Well, we study carefully all the ministry that comes out. Thank God if we do, but Simeon did not only do that.
I have no doubt he read all the ministry that was available, but it says “he came by the Spirit into the temple”. What does that mean? The Apostle says -- “Walk in the Spirit.” That is what Simeon was doing -- walking in the Spirit. What marks those who walk in the Spirit is that they do not fulfil the lusts of the flesh. A man who walks in the Spirit walks in self-judgment and refuses the flesh -- he *refuses* it. Oh, you say, I do not do any particular wrong. Well, I would like you to read Galatians carefully and you will find what are the works of the flesh. It says they are “manifest”. There is nothing mysterious about them -- they are manifest; and
{190}
remember, you may hinder the greatness of this great and glorious Person shining into your heart because you are allowing the flesh through heresies or schools of opinion. Oh, you say, I have got my opinion of course, and I try to get others to think as I do, and, therefore, you do not see the glory of Christ. We cannot possibly see it if we are walking in the flesh. To gather round an opinion, like a little school -- that is the idea; it is just the same as murder and fornication -- the works of the flesh. We may be envious of the place the Lord has given one and another amongst His people, or envious of their material prosperity, and, of course, we do not see Christ. His blessed glory does not open out to my heart while I am walking in the flesh; but Simeon was in the Spirit -- not exactly *by* the Spirit but *in* the Spirit and the light of the glory of that blessed One was discerned by Him. He knew Him and he says “Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go ... for mine eyes have seen thy salvation”. He could bless God in the light of that. The more the eyes of our hearts can see Christ the more we bless God. The way that God gets His true portion in blessing from our hearts, is as we discern Christ, and the way we discern Christ is by walking in the Spirit. There is no other way -- there is no other road.
{191}
Well, now a word or two as regards @Romans 9. The Apostle brings that in there in a wonderful way. He is dwelling first of all upon how much has come through Israel, which I do not touch at the moment, but he comes down to Christ. It says, “of whom ... Christ came”. That blessed Man, for Christ is His name as Man -- He is the anointed Man. Christ is the anointed Man and the Apostle is speaking of Him and thinking of Him as that -- of whom Christ came, but then he turns aside and he says, “who is over all, God blessed for ever”. I believe, dear brethren, that is a ray of light from God by the Spirit as to how we will look at Christ for ever. We will know Him as a blessed Man. How we will delight in it. He has become a Man -- the Man Christ Jesus. He has retained manhood in resurrection for He says, “a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have”. To all eternity He will be Man -- the Son placed in subjection, in man’s place. Clearly man’s place is subjection to God and the Son is placed in subjection at the entrance of eternity. When the kingdom, the thousand years has run its course, there is not a lawless element left in God’s universe of bliss. Then the Son delivers up the kingdom. He delivers up the kingdom to Him who is God and Father, and then it says, “the Son also himself
{192}
shall be placed in subjection”. He will retain man’s place. He will occupy man’s place for ever. Head -- of course, and supreme. What other place could He have? But, nevertheless, He is a Man. But then, there is more than that and we shall eternally recognise it in worship and blessing. While He is the Christ, God’s Anointed, He *is* over all, “God blessed for ever”.
There is no question that while we shall be with Him and like Him and know Him in manhood, this will always be recognised in that blessed scene -- that He is over all, God -- and God known in such a way that He will be blessed for ever. The knowledge we have learned of God in Christ, will lead to the blessing of God for ever from the hearts of the redeemed. It is in the light of what God is as shining out in Christ that God gets the blessing -- the eulogy of our hearts -- not only as Creator (Romans brings that in earlier). The Creator is blessed for ever, and the Apostle says, Amen. He is with that, his mind and heart is in that, but now he is thinking of God made known in Christ, and in the light of that he says, “God blessed for ever”. I am sure that as we discern that, we bless God -- as we discern God made known in Jesus.
The Apostle in Ephesians speaks of things
{193}
that are too great for the natural mind, things which the heart of man cannot conceive. As he approaches the subject he says, “Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ; according as he has chosen us in him before the world’s foundation, that we should be holy and blameless before him in love, having marked us out, for adoption through Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will,” -- “taken us into favour in the Beloved.” He says, “Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ”. Think of what those words mean, and I am sure we take it in but little, that He has blessed us with every spiritual blessing! There is not a spiritual blessing of which we can think, but that He has blessed us with it.
I just wanted to come to this -- He has taken us into favour in the Beloved. What a name for Jesus! It is one of His personal names -- the Beloved -- the One who is the object -- the One who is supreme in the affections of God. My beloved Son -- the One who had that supreme place in the heart of the Father -- the Son of the Father, it says, in truth and in love. *The* Beloved -- the Apostle says. He has taken us into favour in the Beloved -- He has given us the place of sonship -- He has
{194}
given us the Spirit of His Son. As the Apostle thinks of that wonderful sphere of sonship and the blessings of it, he says, “Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.” God, in that character, should be eulogized for ever. So also He should, as Creator, as Redeemer. And He is the Father revealed in Christ, that blessed Man. What blessing will come from the hearts of His own for ever. What themes there are that produce the blessing! All those blessed names -- we shall speak well of them for eternity. Creator, Redeemer, Father -- that is how God is known and in each connection He is blessed by His own. The Creator -- He is blessed for ever -- God over all blessed for ever. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the language of the hearts of His own, and that for ever.
Just one more word. I desire to call attention to Abraham for a moment, because God looking down from heaven, says, I will bless Abraham. He had previously cursed the earth -- cursed the ground. He had said, as He looked on Adam, “Cursed is the ground for thy sake”. Later on, as He looked down upon mankind He says, “My Spirit shall not always strive with man; yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years”. “The end of all flesh is come before me.” It grieved
{195}
Him, it says, at His heart. God looks down again from heaven and sees Abraham. And God blesses Abraham. In blessing, He says, I will bless thee. It is not Abraham blessing God, but God blessing Abraham and God eulogizes Abraham -- God speaks well of Abraham. We would like to be in that, would we not, dear believer, for God to look down and be able to speak well of us? How can He do that? If we have the features of Abraham. Abraham was prepared, as knowing God, to sacrifice the choicest object of his heart. He was prepared to lay on the altar all that he had, for I submit that Isaac represented in totality all that he had; everything else, his flocks, and his herds, and his silver, and his gold, and his man-servants, and his maid-servants were very much less than Isaac. Here is a man who is prepared to put on the altar all that he had, even Isaac, and God blesses him. God can speak well of a man to whom He is so great that that man sacrifices all. God says, “Thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, from me.” God was more to Abraham’s heart than Isaac and all his flocks and herds and silver and gold. When God saw that, He said, “Abraham, Abraham”. Wonderful privilege to be named twice by God! Very few get it. “Abraham, Abraham.” A man that is particularly known in
{196}
heaven -- a man who sacrifices for God and God says, I will bless Abraham. He could speak about Abraham and say, Abraham my friend. You think of that -- Abraham, my friend; and God has much that is good to say about Abraham all through scripture. He is the father of us all -- faithful Abraham.
Is God so great to our hearts as known in Jesus that we are prepared to make sacrifices? I am sure what is called for at the present time is sacrifice on the part of the saints -- not to talk about it but to do it -- as God said to Abraham, “Because thou hast done this”; not because thou hast thought about it, but because thou hast done it -- “In blessing I will bless thee.” The apostle Paul speaks to the Corinthians on the line of sacrifice and says, “Now therefore perform the doing of it” and thus God blesses. You say, What can I sacrifice? The more you know God the more you will sacrifice until a point is reached as with Abraham when he gave all. That was how things stood in the early church. Not one called anything he had his own -- not one, houses, land, money, spiritual wealth -- whatever they had. It says, not one called anything he had his own but all was held for sacrifice, all was offered in sacrifice and God blesses them. He blessed Abraham in the light of that.
{197}
The Lord is bringing back, as we have observed before, the features of the beginning. The Lord is looking for sacrifice for the support of divine interests, and if He sees it He will eulogize what He sees. God said to Abraham, “In blessing I will bless thee”. God will convey His own approval of those who sacrifice -- who *do* it. There are many avenues to it, ways and means which each of us could find out by being in touch with God. God would have us do it, and as doing it, not merely thinking of it, we shall be blessed of God.
May the Lord encourage us to pursue this line that our hearts may be held for God to bless Him as the Creator, to bless Him as known in Christ, to bless the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for His Name’s sake.
{198}
THE COMING CITY
@Hebrews 13: 12 - 14
One has been impressed, recently, by the way the Spirit of God speaks of the world and of the darkness. It says, “the world passeth away and the lust thereof”, @1 John 2: 17, and the Apostle intimates that the darkness is passing, meaning, as I believe, that these moral powers and influences are gradually seen to be disappearing; “passing” being a gradual thought, not that it *has passed*, and not that it *will pass* only, but that it *is passing* in the view of God’s people. Any moment may be the last phase, any moment the final act of the disappearance may take place; and so indeed with the power that is coming in this world. John says, “I saw a beast rising out of the sea”, @Revelation 13: 1. “And I saw another beast rising out of the earth”, @Revelation 13: 11, in the same way, implying the gradual unfoldings of the satanic mind.
Now, I believe we are in one of the most solemn moments of the history of time, and God is helping His people to accept it. We are witnessing the disappearing of the world
{199}
system; the very foundations are giving way. The things that were regarded in the world system as impregnable are falling to pieces, and mighty forces of darkness, which will dominate the world, are rising. The full power is not here yet; thank God the assembly will not be here when the full power of the Antichrist is felt. Now the Apostle says, “We have not here an abiding city, but we seek the coming one”, @Hebrews 13: 14. There is a city coming, not that it *will* come exactly, or that it *has* come, but it is *coming*. It is getting nearer every day. I believe if we make more room for the Spirit of God, that city would become very great to us. In one sense we *have come* to this city, as in @Hebrews 12: 22, “Ye have come to mount Zion and to the city of the living God”, meaning that it is here by the work of God, by the Spirit’s work, in the hearts of the saints; the holy city, the heavenly Jerusalem is here. It is here, but then it is also coming, coming into display, and one desires to say a few words about this coming city.
There are cities that are *going*. It says of Cain that he “went out from the presence of Jehovah ... and he built a city”, @Genesis 4: 16 - 17. There he settled instead of accepting the judgment of God as being “a wanderer and a fugitive on the earth”, @Genesis 4: 14.
{200}
He was content to live without God in his own city, but that city has gone. Then after the flood, they say “Come on, let us build ourselves a city and a tower, the top of which may reach to the heavens”, @Genesis 11: 4. That city has disappeared with all its pride and intellect and glory; it has gone. Then we read of the cities of the plain, Sodom and Gomorrah. What cities they were! Concentrated corruption -- which the world’s cities are, and God has turned those cities into ashes and “condemned them with an overthrow, setting them as an example to those that should afterwards live an ungodly life”, @2 Peter 2: 6. They “lie there”, it says, “as an example, undergoing the judgment of eternal fire”, @Jude 7. They lie there as a witness to God’s eternal displeasure at what Sodom and Gomorrah represent. Then there is Babylon that Nebuchadnezzar built: “Is not this great Babylon, which I have built?” @Daniel 4: 30. That city has gone -- God has touched it. And then Nineveh, that exceeding great city of human pride and glory, can hardly be found.
They are the cities, amongst others, that have gone. Then there are the cities that are *going*. London is one of them, it is a *going* city -- the metropolis of the world. And Rome, too, in its pride; it is called the Eternal City; but it is a doomed city; it is a city that
{201}
is going to disappear in the judgment of God. New York is the same. They are all going. We all naturally love to glory in our cities, but they are the *going* cities every one of them. Then there is that great city Babylon, spiritually. It is not a literal city, as we speak, but a vast religious system in which man exalts himself and usurps the place of Christ and ultimately, of God. That will eventually disappear. It is well for us to take that into account, lest we touch it. God says, “Come out of her, my people, that ye have not fellowship in her sins, and that ye do not receive of her plagues”, @Revelation 18: 4. It is disloyal to Christ and unfaithful to His blessed Name, and God appeals to us. Is there a believer here who is linked with that system? It is “called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified”, @Revelation 11: 8. God would say to you, Come out of her, my people. Tyre is another city that is falling. Tyre is the great commercial system of the world and Tyre is being overthrown. It is coupled with the fall of Babylon. They all weep because the whole system is falling to pieces, and it is not difficult to see that they are the *going* cities today.
The heavenly Jerusalem is the coming city. “We seek the *coming* one”, @Hebrews 13: 14. One desires to encourage every heart to seek
{202}
that city, to be characterised, by the Lord’s help, by the features of that city. Now what are these features? The Psalmist makes it clear: “*Glorious* things are spoken of thee, O city of God”, @Psalm 87: 3. What can be said about that city? Glorious things! The Psalmist says, “*Glorious* things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah”. What fills one’s heart with thankfulness today is the kind of things that are said from the hearts of the saints. Speaking of divine things in a merely mental way is worthless. “Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother”, @Galatians 4: 26. You would not do otherwise than speak with affection and interest of that, and that is how the Lord wants us to speak of “Jerusalem above, which is our mother”. It says “we seek the coming one”, so that with deep exercise of heart we refuse every other feature, and we seek through the Lord’s grace to have these features now.
Now as to the heavenly Jerusalem, the coming city. John hears the word, “Come here, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife. And he carried me away in the Spirit and set me on a great and high mountain and showed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God”, @Revelation 21: 9 - 11. Now I believe that is the first thing. What glorious things can be said about it! This heavenly city,
{203}
is the bride, the Lamb’s wife! It is a company that prefers Christ to everything. That is what the Spirit of God is engaged in at this time, to bring that blessed One, the Bridegroom, into evidence. “He that hath the bride is the bridegroom”, @John 3: 29. What marks the bridegroom is that he has the bride. That means he has her heart, not one affection diverted from him. That is a *glorious* thing, is it not? That displaces every unsuitable feature. It is no good trying to force the love of money and so on out of our hearts, it is making room for the blessed Person of Christ, that secures as a result that the Bridegroom has the bride. Then it says “the Lamb’s wife”. What a *glorious* thing that is to speak of as to the heavenly city! Who is the Lamb? In this book He is the One that has been slain, it is “a lamb standing as slain”, @Revelation 5: 6. One who sacrificed everything, His life, His all, One who never asserted His right to anything. This wonderful city is the compensation He gets for His sufferings. Let us have the features of the bride that prefers Christ to everything and to provide for Him a compensation for His own heart for all His suffering.
Then the city is referred to as “having the glory of God”. That is what I want to speak of now. This coming city has the glory of
{204}
God. Think of God entrusting His glory to anything created. Here is a city, to which God can entrust His glory. Let us seek to be so trustworthy that God can give us a ray of His glory. That He can commit to us the outshining of what He is. It may work out in many ways, for one can never compass His glory. Here is a city that displays what God is. God can trust this city with His glory! How unfaithful we often are! The Lord has given us something, and we have used it to display ourselves; but God’s work in our hearts is that He may have a city which He can trust with His glory. One would commend it to each one of us that we might seek with all our hearts to be trustworthy, to receive rays of the divine glory and express it.
I would like to say a word about the gates, in one connection only. You will remember there were twelve gates, three of them on each side and they were never shut. “And its gates shall not be shut at all by day, for night shall not be there”, @Revelation 21: 25. I want, with the Lord’s help, to suggest that we seek that feature. That we are always accessible. The wall effectually keeps out all the unholy elements. Let defilement, pride, will, or human glory come along and the wall will safely exclude it, but let a movement that is right, however feeble, appear, the gates are
{205}
always open and there is no night there. It means they are *always* open. The more we are in touch with God the more accessible we are. God is supremely accessible. God, “the God of Jacob is our high fortress, Selah”, @Psalm 46: 7. He says in the prophet, “Come now, let us reason together, saith Jehovah”, @Isaiah 1: 18. Come, and speak with Me! That is God! Was there anyone accessible like Jesus? Nobody had any difficulty to approach Jesus -- the Babe in the manger; anyone could go there if they could humble themselves to go! At every point, to every right movement towards God, He was accessible. Zacchaeus may be up a tree with a desire to see Jesus who He was -- “Make haste and come down for today I must abide at thy house”, @Luke 19: 5, says this blessed accessible One.
There is a danger, because we may have light, of putting a fence round ourselves, but the more we are in touch with God and with Christ the more accessible to every right movement we shall be. That is one of the glorious things that are spoken of in the city of God, that the gates are never shut. You can come at any time. Now, dear brethren, let us seek this “coming” city. Thus you bring the city nearer and nearer until it is actually here.
Well then there is another feature of profound importance. There is one street in that
{206}
city, just one! Everybody that comes into it walks in it. The apostle Paul says “many walk, of whom I have told you often and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly and their glory in their shame, who mind earthly things”, @Philippians 3: 18 - 19. They are not in that city. Then he speaks of others who “walk in darkness”. I would appeal to every one of us to judge the first movement of a desire to hide anything from one another. Is there one matter we seek to hide from our brethren? If we walk along that street of transparent glass, we have nothing to hide. Everything is transparent. That helps us to walk together because we are all in that street. Peter and John went up to the temple together. Peter was different to John. His service was different, the work of God in him was different. Peter had nothing to hide from John and John had nothing to hide from Peter. They wanted that Name honoured, each of them; the Name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, so they walk together! And the word is “Look on *us*”, @Acts 3: 4. In every locality, in every city, one would long to hear that -- “Look on us”. Two men walking together is a sight for anyone to see, for heaven to see, for a poor cripple to see!
{207}
Then, in that city there is “a river of water of life, bright as crystal, going out of the throne of God and of the Lamb”, @Revelation 22: 1. What a river! Two things mark the world’s rivers. One is that they have been discovered to be blood; the river of Egypt has been discovered to be that. It is not a secret now, it brings death. None of us go there, I trust. The other thing is that the day is near when a star called Wormwood will fall “upon the third part of the rivers and upon the fountains of waters; ... and the third part of the waters became wormwood: and many of the men died because they were made bitter”, @Revelation 8: 10 - 11. You ask business men what they think about the water they drink. They say, Oh! it is so bitter. All the pleasures of this world that men seek to gratify their hearts with are getting bitter, and God intends to make them more bitter. That is the government of God. But there is another river, the water of *life*, pure and spotless, blessed stream! “The river of God is full of water”, @Psalm 65: 9. It will flow into every one of our hearts. “The streams thereof make glad the city of God”, @Psalm 46: 4. Where does it come from? How can we get it? It only comes from one source. The throne of God and of the Lamb. You say, what does that mean? It means “subjection”.
{208}
We are to have that through eternity; it is a theme that is never to die. Subjection to God and subjection to the Lamb. The giving up of my will, that is what it means. From the moment that Satan lifted up his hand against the throne of God, every conflict that has happened in the world, in local assemblies, in families, in individual hearts, has centred round this. If we would bow to the will of God and give up our own wills, what would happen? Immediate access to this blessed river -- it would satisfy us for ever! I would appeal to the young as to the surrender of our own wills. As subject to the will of God we will have immediate access to this river.
Now there is one other thing. “The city has no need of the sun nor of the moon that they should shine for it, for the glory of God has enlightened it and the lamp thereof is the Lamb”, @Revelation 21: 23. God is the light thereof, He shall shine upon it and the Lamb is the lamp thereof. I believe that is intensely important to us today, to seek it with all our hearts, to seek the city that does not need any lamp. God is the source of light and in that city God shines upon everything. The blessed Person by whom God distributes that light is the One that suffered for us, our Redeemer and Saviour. It means the exclusion of
{209}
human light, however much it may be regarded, particularly in the religious world. The Lord wants us to keep these influences outside and I would urge upon the young particularly to have nothing to do with them. They may appear attractive, but they do not come from God.
Well, one just desires to leave these few thoughts with us. There is much more that could be said about this wonderful city. “His servants shall serve him and they shall see his face and his name is on their foreheads”, @Revelation 22: 3 - 4. What could be said about that? But I only wanted to indicate that this city is coming, and one believes that it is getting nearer. The Lord is working in many hearts to bring these features into existence -- the exclusion of evil, to welcome what is of God, to secure the affections of our hearts for Christ alone, to make us accessible to one another, to set up His supreme throne, that no other will is allowed in our hearts and thus the crystal stream of living water flows and is available to our hearts as we are subject. May the Lord help us to seek these features with all our heart.
{210}
FIRST READING AT VALENCE, FRANCE
@Acts 1: 1 - 26
W.J.H. I think one can see clearly that God’s way is always to end as He begins. The features of the end of any dispensation always agree with the features of the beginning, the difference being that the beginning is mainly light, and the end the state in conformity with the light. I believe that is where the Lord would bring us. One believes one can see in all parts of the world where there are saints governed by the truth of the assembly, the Lord is bringing back the spiritual features of the beginning, not as light, but as state, in view of His coming. So that the beginning of the church’s history is particularly important as indicating what the Lord would bring to pass now in our hearts. One felt the Lord might help us to look at perhaps the first nine chapters of Acts, the ninth chapter arriving at a point when the Lord looking down from heaven, sees that on earth which He can speak of as “Me”. It might be compared to what is said of Adam and his wife, “they shall become one flesh”, @Genesis 2: 24.
{211}
So the Lord in heaven and the church on earth are absolutely one, and that is the kind of vessel the Lord is going to take away in the rapture, as John writes, “Come hither, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife”, @Revelation 21: 9. The Spirit and the bride say, “Come,” and the bride is the Lamb’s wife; she is absolutely one with Him. I believe the Lord will help us to look at these chapters in that way.
Rem. That should be very helpful. We should all like to be increased in regard to the Lord’s thought for us.
W.J.H. I am sure He will bring us back to it. It is clear in scripture that those whom the Lord has taken before, were taken as bearing features that He delighted in. It says of Enoch, “before his translation he has the testimony that he had pleased God”, @Hebrews 11: 5. Then when Elijah was taken it says, “when Jehovah *would* take up Elijah”, @2 Kings 2: 1. He did not take him when he was lying under the juniper tree wanting to die; He took him in all the dignity and power of a mighty conqueror. So the Lord Himself was “carried up into heaven”, @Luke 24: 51. He was so delightful to heaven, that heaven put down its arms, so to speak, and carried Him up. I believe that is how the church is going up, so that one would like to suggest to the youngest
{212}
and to the oldest, that the greatest thing for the moment is to come livingly into the features of that which Christ is going to rapture to Himself. There is nothing to compare with the importance of that; everything on earth looks nothing in the light of it, and the increasing troubles which God is allowing to come upon the world are, I believe, to help us to let the things go that hold us here. So that the first feature brought before us in this passage in Acts, is that the Lord was with His disciples for forty days before He was received up into heaven.
Ques. What are we to understand by the shipwreck in @Acts 27?
W.J.H. That is the public condition of the outward vessel -- one of utter ruin -- broken to pieces. But then there is something else besides that; there is Paul in his own hired house, receiving everyone that comes to him, preaching the kingdom of God, and the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, no one hindering. That is the secret end.
Ques. Have we not already arrived at the shipwreck?
W.J.H. Yes; there can be no question. But the shipwreck is not the end for God. Paul hidden away in secret and holding everything, is His end. The Spirit of God closes the history of Paul, in that position; he is in his own hired
{213}
house; that is, he is not indebted to the world, he has no obligation whatever to the world system. Then he is accessible to everyone that has any exercise; it is a position that any can come to if he wishes, for Paul received everyone that came to him. Then he preached the kingdom of God; that is, the rights of God are maintained at the end. And then the things concerning our Lord Jesus Christ -- the vast system of glory that concerns Him, no one hindering. The Lord will keep that door open till He comes.
Ques. Would Laodicea answer to the shipwreck and Philadelphia to Paul hidden away? Do those two places really give the two positions?
W.J.H. Yes; the one is the private position that the Lord loves intensely. He will make it public. He says, they shall “know that I *have* loved thee”, @Revelation 3: 9, not that I *will* love thee, but I *have* loved thee. But the public position is obnoxious to Him; He is going to spue it out of His mouth very shortly. But we want to be in the private position.
The Lord, when He found the treasure, hid it. That is the thing. He never intended the church to be public. And that is what comes out in this chapter, for the disciples went not to the temple, but to the upper room. How would you find that upper room?
{214}
If you went to the government, they would know nothing of the upper room, and if you went to the leading religious man of the day, he would not know where that room was.
Ques. Would it be right to say that the Holy Spirit is forming in the saints the features that are suitable to that condition of things?
W.J.H. I am sure that is right; so that at the end the Spirit and the bride are together. The Spirit says, as it were, Here is the vessel I have formed, and He will not be ashamed of it.
Ques. Would these features be seen at Bethany?
W.J.H. Quite so; the upper room and Bethany correspond.
Ques. You were asking just now how the upper room was to be found. What is the answer to that question?
W.J.H. I suppose what precedes it in this chapter taught them that such a room was necessary.
Ques. Do you understand that this would be the same upper room as that in which they received the Spirit?
W.J.H. It is the same idea. It may not have been literally the same place, but it is the same thought. The idea of a room is an insignificant place; it is not a palace. Then the thought of it being “upper” is that the
{215}
place is little in this world yet morally elevated above it.
Rem. The upper room would be a spiritual thought.
W.J.H. Quite so, not a material one. You might have an upper room in a building and you might bring pride into it, or jealousy, or envy. Well, it would not be “upper” any longer. It would be on the same level as the world.
Rem. You think the upper room stands for a spiritual state.
W.J.H. Quite so, and therefore what precedes it leads up to it morally. So that the Lord was with them for forty days, going in and out amongst them. I think that is a wonderful thing. Think of the Lord remaining on earth for forty days after His resurrection!
Ques. What is the force of His going in and out amongst them?
W.J.H. I think it was to show that He was actually in resurrection and not simply a spirit. The forty days would prove to them that He was a living Man. That is what forty represents in scripture; it is the period that tests out anything. The forty days of rain at the flood tested the whole of this world, and the forty days in which Moses was on the mount tested the moral state of Israel. The forty days in which the Lord Jesus was in the wilderness
{216}
tested and proved His own perfection. So that these forty days proved perfectly that He was a blessed Man in resurrection. And the Lord would convey that to our hearts at the end, that, as assembling with us, we should have the certainty of His being living.
Rem. It says, “he presented himself living, after he had suffered, with many proofs”, @Acts 1: 3.
W.J.H. Yes, and while, of course, we do not see Him physically now, yet He is giving the sense of His presence at the end in a new and living way, so that we have no doubt in our souls as to His resurrection. It is not simply that we believe it because it is in @1 Corinthians 15, but we believe it because we know something of His blessed presence.
Rem. That is to say we have “many proofs”. We have them in the shape of experiences of His being with us.
W.J.H. That is very good. At that time the enemy flooded the world with a lie about the Lord’s resurrection; the keepers were told to say that the disciples came and stole His body away. And Christendom is being filled with lies about Christ from the same source -- lies about His work, and as to His present position. But the “many proofs” would be the consciousness of His presence, and if we get that, we are delivered from the lies. So
{217}
that the church’s history began with the assurance in every heart that He was a living Man.
Rem. In @1 Corinthians 15 we have the proof of His resurrection, but here we have it for our own enjoyment.
W.J.H. It is given there as doctrine; the Apostle preached that Christ died, and was buried, and rose again. But then there is the secret thing. He appeared; He appeared to Peter, and then later to five hundred brethren at once. What would any of those five hundred say if the lie that Satan spread came to their ears? They would say, But I have seen Him, and the lie would fall on deaf ears. And the lies of today will fall on deaf ears if we have the sense of His presence, and that is what the Lord is giving in a peculiar way at the end, as at the beginning.
Ques. So that the answer to the lie Satan is spreading, is the truth we enjoy today.
W.J.H. The greatest preservation is the consciousness of His presence, not simply that we know certain things as truth or as light, but we are conscious He is with us. And the Lord is prepared to give that if these conditions exist; and He is giving it.
Ques. Do we get these experiences individually or collectively?
W.J.H. Both; so that in @1 Corinthians 15 it says He appeared to Cephas; that is,
{218}
to one man. But then He appeared to the twelve. Then later to five hundred brethren at once, and the Apostle says, that last of all He appeared to him. Mark’s gospel tells us that He appeared *first* to Mary Magdalene (@Mark 16: 9). She was the first person on earth to see Him. These scriptures indicate that the consciousness of His presence is both for an individual heart and for the enjoyment of all as assembling together. But conditions are necessary. The Lord says, “he” -- that is, one person -- “that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him”, @John 14: 21. There it is; it comes right down to the possibility of one heart. These appearings were not accidental. When the Lord appeared first to Mary Magdalene there was a reason.
Ques. Why is not the witness of Mary given in Corinthians?
W.J.H. Because there it is a question of public testimony, and a woman does not come into that. There it is what the Apostle preached; it is public witness. But Mark gives you the private side.
Rem. Mary is very prominent in John’s gospel.
W.J.H. Yes; but John does not say that
{219}
she was first. Mark says that He appeared to her *first*.
Ques. Would that be the privilege of one who hears His voice and opens the door as we have it in Laodicea?
W.J.H. Indeed; the Lord would knock at every door in Laodicea.
Ques. Do we see the necessary conditions furnished in John at Patmos?
W.J.H. Yes; he was a bondman; that is, simply living to do the will of the Lord. The Lord would tell such a person all His secrets. So that the first feature brought forward is the “many proofs” that the Lord was risen, and we cannot have assembly features unless we have that. The Lord remained for forty days to assure them that He was a living Man.
Then the next section, from verse 6, seems to bring in a danger. The disciples think it is the time to put the earth right, and put Israel back into its position. And I think we have to beware of that kind of thing, that we are not diverted on account of it.
Ques. What do you mean by that? Is it not part of our hope that the world should be put right?
W.J.H. Do you not find that there is a tendency amongst God’s people and in our
{220}
own hearts to be particularly concerned with what is happening in the world, to determine our position by what is going on around. We look at Russia, for instance, or Italy, or Palestine, or the industrial world, with all its cruelty at the present moment, and there is the tendency to look around on these things. But the Lord would take our eyes off that and call our attention to the Spirit. We will not get things by looking at the nations and Israel, but by the Spirit. So that in the assembly the voice of the Spirit is heard, and you will find things out more reliably that way than by looking outside. When the Lord first came to this scene there was one man that knew He was coming; he was certain of it. He knew that he would not die until he had seen the Lord’s Christ. It says it was revealed to him by the Spirit, and he came in the Spirit into the temple (@Luke 2: 26, 27). He recognised the Spirit of God. The Holy Spirit, it says, was upon him, and he knew what was happening. So that when the little Babe came into the temple, he could recognise Him; he took Him in his arms and blessed God. How did he know that? Not by signs in the world, but by the Spirit. And that is what the Lord would impress upon us: It is not a question of signs but the Spirit, and the thing is to hear the voice of the Spirit.
{221}
Rem. What we see in Simeon at the beginning is to be seen again at the end.
W.J.H. Yes; the beginning and the end are to be the same.
Ques. Is it suggested here that the disciples had not left the national thought? God was going to bless *men*, not only Israel.
W.J.H. That is good; the Spirit of God does not come in relation to a national position. The house of God is not a national matter at all, and the Spirit of God speaks expressly there; that is where He speaks (@1 Timothy 4: 1).
Rem. It is the house of prayer for all nations.
W.J.H. That is it; it rises above what is national. The Lord is helping on that line so that the brethren are lifted above the boundaries of nationality, and holy affections exist whether you live in Norway or New Zealand. There is one voice being heard in the house of God -- the voice of the Spirit, and if we listen to that we shall know what is going to happen. What a wonderful day every day must have been to Simeon. Every morning he set out with the sense in his heart that this might be the day that he should see Christ. He knew that he would not die till he had seen Him. If you had said to him, Simeon, business is collapsing, the thrones of the world are giving way, and things are getting increasingly difficult in the world, he would say, I
{222}
realise that, but Christ is coming -- the One who is the solution to everything is coming -- the salvation of God. So that it would have altered every day for him. But he had got all that by listening to the voice of the Spirit. I suggest that the Lord is going to give the definite sense of His coming to those who are in the state to receive it. What a difference it makes to the whole of your outlook if you receive that. I have no doubt we have all seen it in those the Lord has taken away through death. A brother (or a sister) learns that he or she cannot live more than three months. Well, he looks on everything differently from that moment. Everything is done in the light of the fact that he is going to meet the Lord in three months. That is the kind of feeling that will come into the hearts of those that can receive it at the end.
Rem. He is coming to those who wait for Him. Is there that which corresponds in that expression?
W.J.H. Simeon was such a man; he was waiting. But how did he wait? He did not stand at his door wondering when he would see Christ, but he devoted every day to the Lord’s service, not as a hireling for wages, but as a bondman. So he says, “Lord, now lettest thou thy bondman go.” Simeon was simply a bondman seeking every day to carry out
{223}
the Lord’s will. That is what I understand by those who wait for Him.
Rem. Simeon was in the spirit of Christ. It says of Him prophetically: “he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed”, @Isaiah 50: 4.
W.J.H. Very good; each morning he was waiting and hoping that that would be the day, but he filled in the day as a bondman. The question is, Are we prepared for a bondman’s place? I think we shall miss the secret if we are not prepared for that.
Rem. A bondman does not look for wages.
W.J.H. No; he gets no wages, nor any holidays, nor time off. He has no liberty whatever. His sole life is to serve his master, morn and midday and night. That is the kind of man Simeon was; he says, Thy bondman. He is the man that knows things, for it is to the bondmen that the Lord gives His secrets. The book of Revelation is only intended for bondmen; it is the “Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show to his bondmen ... sending by his angel, to his bondman John”, @Revelation 1: 1.
Ques. And has not the Lord taken that place Himself for ever?
W.J.H. Indeed; that is what would make it attractive to our hearts, to know that He has taken a bondman’s form (@Philippians 2: 7).
{224}
Rem. It says here, “It is not yours to know times or seasons, which the Father has placed in his own authority”, @Acts 1: 7.
W.J.H. Quite so; all our business is to do His will -- whatever He tells us. Now in Malachi’s day, which corresponds to Simeon’s, the public position was that men brought to the Lord what was worthless. If a man had a blind sheep or one that was maimed or diseased so that he could do nothing with it, he would give it to the Lord. But that was not Simeon. Simeon says, Everything I possess, my time, my heart, my money, my body is devoted to the Lord. I am simply a bondman to do His will. And God says, I will tell that man what I am doing; I can trust him. What a wonderful thing to come into that.
Rem. A bondman has no will of his own.
W.J.H. None whatever; so that when you come to Mary, the mother of Jesus, she knew more than anyone that the Lord was coming -- that the Son of God, the Son of the Highest was about to enter this world and deal with everything. He would put the proud from their seats and exalt the humble. But why should she know? For the same reason as Simeon. She says, “Behold the bondmaid of the Lord. Be it to me according to thy word”, @Luke 1: 38. And afterwards she says, “he
{225}
has looked upon the low estate of his bondmaid (@Luke 1: 48). That is what made Mary a suited vessel for this wonderful light; she was simply a bondmaid in the Lord’s hands to do what He willed. That is how we get secrets: there is no other way, but it is worth it.
Rem. You have given us examples of those affording conditions in James and in Simeon, but you spoke also of Mary Magdalene. Will you say a word as to what you see in her?
W.J.H. The Lord graciously accepted in the main while in flesh and blood the limitations of human life, but when in resurrection beyond flesh and blood He moved sovereignly. He comes into a room when the doors are shut. He joins the two going to Emmaus and disappears out of their sight, indicating His right to move where He likes. So He deliberately chose to appear first to Mary Magdalene, and that puts a wonderful dignity and honour upon her. We have often thought that she just happened to meet Him, but that is not so at all. He appeared first to her; *He* appeared. And the reason is given in Mark, where that is recorded. It says, “out of whom he had cast seven demons”, @Mark 16: 9.
{226}
SECOND READING AT VALENCE
@Acts 1: 10 - 26
W.J.H. This afternoon we were looking at two features that marked the assembly at the beginning, first, the certainty of the resurrection of Christ indicated in His remaining and assembling with them for forty days, and secondly, the importance of recognising the voice of the Spirit, rather than being governed by what is going on in the world. The third feature that one would call attention to is, that they were witnesses of His being taken to heaven. It says in verse 9, “having said these things he was taken up, they beholding him”. It is not exactly that He went up, ascending in His own right, which is rather the side presented by John when it is referred to, but that He was taken up. It was the act of God and the act of heaven. The disciples witnessed His being taken up, which would leave an eternal impression on their hearts of how precious He was to heaven, that heaven took Him up. Then it says that the cloud having received Him out of their sight, they gaze up into heaven, indicating, in that
{227}
way, that the object of their hearts was in heaven, not on earth. I believe that is the third great feature, that the early church had its object in heaven. Not one thing on earth was an object for the church at the beginning, and I believe the Lord would bring that back livingly. The conditions that God is permitting to take place in the world find us out; they discover how much our object has been on earth. When earthly things are disappearing on every hand, our eyes are opened to find out in many cases that our object has been here. What do you say to that?
Rem. I am sure that is right. I was thinking of Philippians, where we read of those “who mind earthly things”, @Philippians 3: 19. Then, too, in the Revelation judgment comes on the earth-dwellers (@Revelation 6: 10).
W.J.H. Yes. I do not think we realise how much our object has been here until we lose something, and God is permitting His people to lose a good deal that they have had. But I believe that is one way in which He is helping us to find our object in heaven, for it says, “the Lord himself, with an assembling shout ... shall descend from heaven”, @1 Thessalonians 4: 16. The One who is our precious object is in heaven and is coming from heaven. I think if we can look at things like that we shall not be so distressed at what the Lord is
{228}
allowing; we shall see that it is really the hand of love, that He is seeking to get His own place in our hearts.
Rem. There is a remarkable verse in Jeremiah where God is speaking of withdrawing His earthly people from all the countries whence they had been driven (@Jeremiah 16: 16). He speaks there of fishers as if He would fish them out, and if that does not accomplish His purpose there are hunters, as if He would hunt them out.
W.J.H. That is interesting, but better still is the word in Hosea, “behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak to her heart”, @Hosea 2: 14. The Lord would, first of all, allure us out. I believe that is why the Supper has been revived in our day, to allure us out. Those other elements to which you have referred in Jeremiah would assist too, but the great thing is that He would draw us out under the influence of His love. And one delights to see in various parts, that this feature is coming to light -- brothers and sisters whose real object in life is Christ as the One who has been taken to heaven. We want to come into that feature.
Ques. And is that object great enough to hold us together?
W.J.H. That is really what follows, that
{229}
they went back to this upper room, every one finding an object in Christ in heaven. And they lived together, as it says, “*where abode* Peter, and John”. They all lived together and it needs one object to enable us to live together. The object of every one in that upper room was Christ, and that is what makes unity. They are all different persons, for they are all named, yet they are together and abiding there.
Ques. Do we not see in Stephen that notwithstanding the dreadful circumstances in which he found himself as being stoned, he had his eyes directed towards heaven?
W.J.H. Distinctly -- his object was there. So that he never departed from the character of the dispensation, which is grace.
Ques. Would you say there is a reproach in the angel’s word, “why do ye stand looking into heaven?”, @Acts 1: 11.
W.J.H. Somewhat -- in the sense that we do not physically look up into heaven. The way we express that Christ in heaven is our object, is that we devote ourselves to His interests in His absence. That is the proof that He is our object. If I find a brother or a sister with no living interest in the assembly, in that which is precious to Christ, and yet professing to love the Lord, it is doubtful whether it is true. The proof of it would be
{230}
devotedness to all that belongs to Him. The two men tell them that He is coming back, and then they instinctively return to Jerusalem to the upper room and proceed to care for His interests.
Rem. In @John 20 the disciples are seen going back to their own homes. Here there seems to be advance.
W.J.H. Quite -- they have been through these experiences since then. They have found the Lord, and they have seen Him go up to heaven, they know He is coming back, and therefore they devote themselves to His interests.
Ques. Why do the two men refer to the disciples as “men of Galilee”?
W.J.H. That is very good; if we are not called Galileans we shall not have the features of the early church. Until the Lord returns His own are men under reproach. “Men of Galilee” are men who belong to a reproached condition of things, and the Lord intends that to remain until He comes back. If we are not connected with what is under reproach, we are not connected with what is of Christ. The Lord was under reproach here; He was despised and rejected. The wonderful thing is that He accepted that in resurrection; He said, I will see you in Galilee (@Matthew 28: 10). In resurrection He says, I will see you *there*,
{231}
not in Jerusalem. The angel says, “he goes before you into Galilee, *there* shall ye see him.” That is the place where you will see Him; nowhere else. You will find Him in Galilee; that is the place of reproach. And, indeed, the Lord accepts reproach on the throne. Saul of Tarsus said to the One who was in heaven, “Who art thou, Lord?” and He said, “I am Jesus, the Nazaraean”, @Acts 22: 8, not “I was” but “I am”. He is still the reproached and despised One, although on the throne of heaven. And that will remain until He returns. Hence the two men say, “Ye men of Galilee.” Nazareth was in Galilee.
Rem. There are no theological schools in Galilee. And it says, “Search and look, that no prophet arises out of Galilee”, @John 7: 52.
W.J.H. Quite -- indeed Nathanael said, “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?”, @John 1: 46. He thought, Is it possible? But the church will be composed of men of Galilee till the Lord comes. They will not be men of Galilee after that; they are going to judge angels (@1 Corinthians 6: 3). So that you have all these names of persons in the upper room living together at the beginning, and I believe the Lord would revive these names. While the persons themselves -- the apostles -- have gone, the features that they represent are coming back.
{232}
Ques. Do you think each one suggests some element found in the assembly?
W.J.H. I am sure of it, there were one hundred and twenty names. A name means something. The holy city which is the bride, the Lamb’s wife, has twelve names in the foundation of its wall. The wall rests upon these names, and we shall never have a wall unless it does rest upon these names.
Rem. You must explain that a little further.
W.J.H. Well, it says, “where abode Peter”. That is the first name, and Peter is always first. He represents the truth of the kingdom which is the principle of subjection. That is the first principle in the universe of God; it is the first principle in the assembly. You never read anywhere of John and Peter. When the two apostles are referred to, Peter is always first because subjection must be first. Some think they can have love first, but that cannot be. And some say that the gospel ought to be first, but the Lord says Peter is first. When He chose the twelve, Matthew tells us that the names of the apostles are these: “first, Simon who was called Peter”, @Matthew 10: 2. And the Lord does not make any mistakes. Subjection to Him in everything is the first principle in the assembly. And the Lord is bringing that feature back; Peter is being revived; the Lord is recovering the
{233}
true features of subjection. So that it is not a question of what men think; it is not a question of what we thought was right thirty or forty years ago. The great question is, What does the Lord say? Well, knowing that, it is a matter of obedience. That is first, and I believe that is what Peter stands for.
Ques. Is not subjection the great subject of Peter’s ministry?
W.J.H. Quite -- he extends the principle to children, to servants, to their masters, to subjects of the government, to the younger as to the elder, and then he says, all of you to one another (@1 Peter 5: 5).
Then being subject, you can have what John represents. Even in a home you must have Peter first. A father may love his children immensely, but that love cannot flow out if the children refuse to obey. But let the children obey, and the love flows in all its sweetness. So that John is the next name, and John’s ministry is to unfold the greatness of divine love. He stands for the enjoyment of spiritual relationships and affections proper to the family of God, and these are coming back. Our presence here together at this time is a proof that family affections are coming back. I do not know whether we could profitably touch all these names, but that is the idea, that the Lord would bring back every feature that the twelve represent.
{234}
Ques. Is it important that Judas Iscariot is omitted? He had gone to his own place.
W.J.H. Indeed, and it is important that we should go through this exercise of excluding him. I believe that is one thing we are faced with every Lord’s Day. Is Judas excluded? It says, “In the night in which he was delivered up” Jesus took bread (@1 Corinthians 11: 23). Every Lord’s Day morning we are reminded of that night. Have we judged what Judas did? That is the challenge. We must not think it was Judas, and that we could not do it. Every one of the twelve said, “Lord, is it I?” And they say here, “he was one of us”, @Acts 1: 17.
We are very often face to face with a crisis like that. A position arises in business, maybe where an unrighteous act would lead to extra profit. Well, if we allow that, we shall lose the Lord; we cannot have both. Which shall we have? I believe we are face to face with that very often. Or it may be an unholy association, or unfaithfulness in the relationships of life. Or perhaps we could have a moment’s self-gratification, or a morsel of bread, like Esau, but we shall lose Christ. Which shall we have? The Lord reminds us every first day of the week, that he, Judas, was “one of us”. He is reminding us of that at the end, that we should not betray Him.
{235}
Take a sister -- she could have a husband and a home, but he is an ungodly man. If she marries him she will lose Christ, and His assembly, and His precious interests. Which will she have? That is what the Supper brings us to -- the night in which He was betrayed. Judas said, I would rather have thirty pieces of silver than Christ. The Lord said, “It was thou, a man mine equal”. He said, “We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in company”, @Psalm 60: 13, 14. The Lord and Judas had gone up to the temple together; Judas had heard Him pray; he had seen the zeal that cleansed the temple. But he says, I would rather have thirty pieces of silver than Christ. The Lord would take up this matter with us, as here they said, “Lord, knower of the hearts of all”, @Acts 1: 24. They said, Lord, look into our hearts -- we want a man whose heart is right in place of Judas.
Ques. Why did the Lord leave the choice to the apostles? He had been with them for forty days, why did He leave it to them?
W.J.H. Because He wanted them to take up this matter in their souls and to face it out. Then, too, He wanted to bring out another principle that would obtain throughout the whole dispensation, that is, the right that He has to act sovereignly. That is a very testing principle. They brought these two names, and
{236}
then they cast the lot into the lap; they said, Lord, show whom *Thou* hast chosen. “The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord”, @Proverbs 16: 33. Every time they saw Matthias they might have said, What right has this man to be an apostle? The only answer would have been that the Lord had chosen him.
Rem. That would have been enough for any true lover of Christ.
W.J.H. Yes; but it tests us more than we can tell to submit to the sovereignty of the Lord.
Ques. Is there any signification in the fact that the one the Lord chose had one name, whereas the other had three?
W.J.H. I do not know, but I think the point is that it was the Lord’s own choice, and that it was His right to choose. If I am subject, I shall not have any difficulty as to the sovereignty of the Lord; I shall welcome it. But if I want *my* way, and *my* will carried out, and I find the Lord sovereignly doing something quite different, my will may lead to rebellion. I do not think we realise how we are tested by sovereignty. Supposing the Lord raises up a distinct gift and help to the saints in a neighbouring locality, I wonder what we would think of it. Would we be prepared to bow to the Lord’s sovereignty? Or suppose He raises up one in our midst,
{237}
what attitude are others going to adopt? It is going to test the rest. We might say, Why should this one be chosen? But it is not in our hands; it is the Lord’s doing. The brethren everywhere have been tremendously tested like that. But the Lord will do as He likes. As He did at the beginning of the church’s history, so He will do at the end, and our happiness is to bow to His sovereign will.
Rem. You would say there must be the twelve names.
W.J.H. Yes, twelve is the administrative number; there must be proper administration in the assembly. Perhaps it might be well to refer to one or two more names. I have greatly enjoyed seeing that Bartholomew is there; he is living in the upper room with all the brethren, filling his part most happily. What does his name stand for? The idea of a name in scripture is renown; what is the renown of Bartholomew?
Rem. We do not know much about Bartholomew, do we?
W.J.H. No; that is just the point. That is what he represents -- a man who is happy to go on with his service to the Lord unnoticed and unknown, out of sight; a man who serves the Lord in obscurity. Such a man lives in the upper room; he does not ask that his name should be mentioned in any way as doing
{238}
anything; he is not seeking to advertise himself at all. He represents a wonderful feature, and I would like to encourage all of us as to Bartholomew, for he stands for what marks most of us; that is, he is hidden away, quietly going on with the Lord’s service, happy in the place the Lord has given him, not wanting a better place, not coveting John’s place, nor Philip’s place, but quietly and contentedly filling his own part in obscurity. One would greatly desire that the brethren might continue in the characteristics of Bartholomew.
Then there is Thomas, and if I could read our minds I think I could tell what we are thinking of him; that is, the wrong thing that Thomas did. Unbelieving Thomas; that is how he is known in the world. It will be remembered that when the Lord said, Let us go into Judea again, the disciples said, “Even but now the Jews sought to stone thee, and goest thou thither again?” And Thomas said, “Let us also go, that we may die with him”, @John 11. He says, as it were, Let us go and follow Him even if we are stoned. That is the sort of name you want in the upper room, and we should like to have a few names like that, that is, preparedness to follow the Lord even if it means being put to death.
Ques. Does he not rather encourage others to go?
{239}
W.J.H. Yes; he says, Let *us* go. He does not talk about himself. He would link everybody with him.
Then there is Judas, not Iscariot; he has a name there. That is another feature proper to the upper room. A good many difficulties would have been saved if Judas had been present. And what marks Judas? Well, the only thing that distinguishes him is that when the Lord said something he did not understand, he did not refuse it and say, It is wrong; he enquired of the Lord about it. Judas, not Iscariot, said, “Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us and not to the world?”, @John 14: 22. He told the Lord that he did not understand. And so he enquired, and how much trouble would be saved if we enquired; instead of saying we do know when we do not, or instead of saying it is wrong, because we do not understand when the Lord gives light. If Judas is present, we shall enquire of the Lord to teach us. That is a most valuable name; the Lord loves to see His people enquire. I would like the brethren to get hold of the idea of enquiring. The temple is the place in which to enquire, as it says, “to enquire of him in his temple”, @Psalm 27: 4. There is much that we do not understand, but the Lord would teach us if we would enquire.
{240}
Then we might refer to verse 14 where it says, “with several women”. One rejoices in that, that the women were so formed spiritually that they were equal to being in the upper room; they were fit to be companions with Peter, with John, with Philip, with Judas, with Matthias. The women are there; they represent the hidden subjective state of our hearts -- the secret condition as the Lord sees it, but the men represent the public position of light and testimony. Both sides were together at the beginning, and the Lord wants them together at the end, not only that we see what is right according to His mind, but that our hidden state, which only His eye sees, is in accord with Him. I think that is what is going to mark the end, that I am not different secretly from what I am publicly. That is how things were at the beginning.
And then it says, “and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren”, @Acts 1: 14. That comes in last of all. Mary the mother of Jesus is last. The natural connection, the link with Christ after the flesh gives her no place whatever above the others in the upper room. The only thing that gives anybody a place there, is the work of God in their souls, and Mary the mother of Jesus is quite happy to accept that. She claims no rights whatever in the upper room. I wonder what we should
{241}
do if Mary the mother of Jesus or James His brother were to come to the breaking of bread. If we were living in accord with the upper room, we should not make any difference; we should all go on in relation to the work of God in us, as they did at the beginning. Now that, of course, does not affect us literally, but it affects us morally. The rich brother claims nothing in the upper room; the brother intelligent naturally claims nothing, the poor brother claims nothing. You do not claim any special consideration because you are poor or because you are rich; you just accept the place the work of God in you entitles you to. And that makes things simple, yet real.
Rem. And it would give us liberty.
W.J.H. Yes; liberty for all that is of God, and the exclusion of all that is of the flesh and of the earth.
Rem. It says, they “gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer”, @Acts 1: 14. There was liberty to pray.
W.J.H. Quite so, and Mary was there in prayer. They did not pray *to* Mary, but Mary prayed to the Lord with them.
{242}
THIRD READING AT VALENCE
@Acts 2: 1 - 13; @Acts 2: 42 - 47
W.J.H. At these meetings we have been considering a few of the features that marked the church at the outset, having in mind that the Lord will end with the same features. We were noticing the Lord with the disciples for forty days, conveying to them a complete assurance of His resurrection. Then we saw how the Lord said they were not to be occupied with times or seasons, but that the Spirit of God was coming and that the great thing would be to hear His voice. Then that the Lord was taken up to heaven in their sight, as it says, “they beholding him”, @Acts 1: 9. We saw thus that the object of their hearts was no longer on earth, but in heaven. Then that they returned to the upper room -- an unpretentious place being suggested by the room, but it is above the moral level of the world. Where, it says, abode certain ones, each bringing in, as we saw, his own particular feature, and the women, that is the subjective secret side was there as well as the public side. Then there was the exercise that Judas
{243}
should be replaced. I think that covers the main points we have been looking at, and one felt that the Lord would bring these features back; indeed, it is a delight to see them appearing in various parts of the world. Then I thought the chapter we have just read brings before us the character of the Spirit’s presence in the church, so that we should make room for the same character of His presence now.
I sometimes wonder if we fully believe scripture. The Lord said, “It is profitable for you that I go away, for if I go not away the Comforter will not come”, @John 16: 7. If we were to speak exactly what is in our minds, I wonder if we would agree that it is better to be on earth in the Spirit’s day than in the day when Jesus was on earth. I think many would say that they would have liked to have lived when Jesus was actually here, that that would have been sublime happiness and privilege, but the Lord said, It is profitable for you that I go away. So that we are living in the most privileged day in the history of time -- more privileged than those who lived when Jesus was literally here. But to come into that we must make room for the Spirit. The character of the Lord’s work as moving about in this world was largely external, benefits being received in relation to people’s
{244}
bodies; in one case it says, “he healed them all”. But except for a few, not many seem to have got much gain in their souls.
There does not seem to have been much spiritual formation, so that even the disciples on the eve of the Lord’s death, when He was going to give up everything, were disputing amongst themselves who should be greatest; showing how little positive formation there was even in those who had been with Him personally and so closely. But as soon as the Spirit came you see not physical benefits merely, but most wonderful spiritual formation. Take a man like Stephen, the very living expression of Christ. It says, he was full of the Holy Spirit (@Acts 7: 55). The Spirit has come to form something within us spiritually, not to heal our bodies in an outward way, though, of course, what the Lord did outwardly was representative of what He would do inwardly, but the work of the Spirit is in us, and abides eternally when our bodies as we now have them have passed away. It says, “By his Spirit he hath garnished the heavens”, @Job 26: 13. The Spirit in that way has come to gather the gems with which God would garnish the heavens.
Rem. You think the Lord being here was more the objective side, but the Spirit more the subjective side, what is within us?
{245}
W.J.H. That is always the position; Christ is the object. The Spirit has come to form Christ in our hearts, in our minds, in our spirits, and Stephen is a kind of climax that is reached, so that as you look at Stephen you cannot help thinking about Christ, because you see Him expressed in that vessel. But that came by the Spirit’s work; it was not natural to Stephen, but it says, “Stephen being full of the Holy Ghost”. I do hope the brethren will get hold of the thought of this wonderful period, that a divine Person has come to earth to form in the believer, for eternal expression, the character of Christ. That is what I believe the Lord meant when He said, It is profitable for you that I go away.
Ques. It says in @Psalm 118: 24, “This is the day that the Lord hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it”. Would that be the Spirit’s day?
W.J.H. That day is the day in which the stone that the builders rejected has become the head of the corner. It says, “This is the Lord’s doing; it is marvellous in our eyes. This is the day which the Lord hath made ... “ That is, Christ is exalted as supreme, as we noticed in the last chapter. Then the Spirit comes. But to get the gain of His presence we must have these features. So that the
{246}
first thing mentioned is that they were all together, and the total number, we are told, was a hundred and twenty. It says, “the crowd of the names” meaning that each one was different -- a hundred and twenty names. But it says they were all together, and that is not a physical idea but a moral one. In object and heart and mind they were together. And I think that is essential if we are to have the Spirit’s presence in power.
Ques. You are not thinking of each individual believer having the Spirit, but rather the collective idea?
W.J.H. Yes; we shall come to the individual side presently, but here it is the consciousness of His presence amongst God’s people as together.
Rem. So that in @Psalm 133, where the brethren are seen dwelling together in unity, we have the thought of the precious oil and the dew of Hermon.
W.J.H. Yes; unity provides a condition in which the Spirit can come down. Whatever number you have walking together, every one is different; every brother and sister is different; each one has a name. But if we are going to have the consciousness of the Spirit’s presence we must be really together. It is not a question merely of being in one room, but together in heart and mind. If one
{247}
brother or sister brings in an element of discord, or envy, or malice, then we are no longer really together; we might still meet in the same room, but once these elements are allowed we are morally apart, and that will interfere with the consciousness of the Spirit’s presence. So that one would urge that we should all continually judge these things, so that we can be really together, so that we should not miss the great privilege of the present time, that into our midst might come that which corresponds to the “sound from heaven”; there is no sound like that. None of us want to interrupt that.
Ques. And what do you think that sound suggests?
W.J.H. That sound from heaven brings right down into our hearts a report of the glory of Christ. That is why He has come. “He shall glorify me”, @John 16: 14. That sound would bring down a message as to what is going on in heaven, and you can listen to nothing better than that.
Ques. Why is it described as a rushing mighty wind? In another connection we have a still small voice.
W.J.H. That is another feature, indicating mighty, irresistible power, but first let us look at this sound from heaven. There are sounds travelling through the air today, and some
{248}
are listening to them. Such sounds may tell you what is going on in the commercial world, while a good many are of the moral character of hell. You will never hear one message from heaven through those sounds, and I would urge that none of us give our ears to them. I do not refer, of course, to cables or such like messages, but to other things that are being used, things that bring that which originates with Satan into the houses of men. But the sound from heaven brings a report of Christ, and that is the sound we want to hear.
Ques. You think, then, that this sound continues?
W.J.H. Where should we be if we did not hear it? What would there be worth listening to? The apostle says, “The Holy Ghost testifies in every city”, @Acts 20: 23. As he went from city to city he heard the voice of the Spirit, showing that the Lord would have it in *every* city.
Ques. Do you think he would have heard that voice, that sound, in the circle of the saints?
W.J.H. Surely; that is how the Spirit speaks; He has not become incarnate. He speaks through the vessels that He occupies, and He will occupy all our hearts if we make room for Him.
Ques. Has not that side of things been
{249}
largely lost sight of? Is not the Lord drawing attention to it now?
W.J.H. I am sure of that. It is one of the great features of the recovery, that the voice of the Spirit is recognised and listened to, so that there has been a wonderful expansion in the enjoyment of what is heavenly, in the knowledge of Christ in heaven, of the place of glory and power that belongs to Him. The sound from heaven has brought that.
Rem. From what you are calling attention to, it is evident already that it is better to live in the Spirit’s day.
W.J.H. Yes; if we see that more clearly we shall not waste a day; every day will be precious.
Rem. I suppose the Spirit would touch our hearts. The exhortation is that we should not harden our hearts (@Hebrews 3: 15). The hardening would prevent our getting His touch.
W.J.H. Quite so. Nothing touches the heart more than a message about Christ. John Baptist said, He must increase, and He will continue to increase until He fills all things. He has gone up, it says, far above all heavens that He might fill all things (@Ephesians 4: 10). So that we need not think we have discovered the fulness of Christ; He is so supremely great that He is going to fill heaven and earth.
{250}
And the sound from heaven makes Him greater and greater, until at last He fills our hearts.
Rem. The Spirit has much more to say to our hearts about Christ if we are prepared to listen.
W.J.H. I believe there is much more to be said in our day -- a further appreciation of the greatness of Christ. Then we come to what our brother referred to, that is, the mighty tempestuous blowing which indicates that the movements of the Spirit will be sovereign. Nobody can attempt to direct the wind. What would you think of a man that went out in a gale and tried to direct the wind? The Lord said, “the wind bloweth where it listeth”. You do not know whence it comes, and you do not know where it goes (@John 3: 8). It is not in our hands.
Rem. Though as to the Spirit I suppose we can say whence He comes.
W.J.H. We can in that sense; He came from heaven. But in the character of the wind His movements are not discernible; He goes where He will.
Rem. You mean that knowing whence He came is not the point of the wind.
W.J.H. We cannot direct the wind, but we can follow it. If we get into the current we are in irresistible power, but if we get out
{251}
of the current, then the ship cannot go at all. It is like a sailing vessel getting becalmed. Come into the wind and everything goes well, but get out of it and you can make no progress at all. The Lord wants to bring us into the wind to move on till the moment of His coming.
Ques. Would Philip be an example of a servant who moved in the current of the wind?
W.J.H. Quite so. He might have said, Why go down to the desert? Why leave Samaria where the Lord is blessing me? But he was subject; he was where the Spirit could use him.
Rem. And the Spirit also caught him away to Azotus.
W.J.H. So with the apostle Paul; it says, “they attempted to go to Bithynia, and the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them”, @Acts 16: 7. Then they were directed to Philippi, that is, to Europe instead of eastward to Asia. Now the natural mind would say, Why not go into Asia; look at all the Asiatics, 1,000,000,000 (one thousand million) human beings there, Indians, Chinese, Japanese. The apostle was moving that way, and it says, the Spirit suffered him not. We might say, Why? But we cannot control the wind. The wind blows where it will blow. All we can do is to follow the wind. Paul did follow the wind, and all that
{252}
the Lord has got out of Europe came out of his doing it.
Ques. What does it mean that the wind filled the house? (@Acts 2: 2).
W.J.H. That is a very important remark; it means that there is to be no other power in the house. If it filled the house, there was not one corner anywhere that had room for any other sound or any other power. What it would have been if the church had kept to that! How many other powers have come into christendom from the human mind, from heathenism, and indeed from Satan himself. But the divine thought is that the house should be filled with the wind, that every movement in the assembly should be in the power of the Holy Spirit.
Rem. It says it “filled all the house *where they were sitting*”. Does that mean that there was no movement on the part of man?
W.J.H. That is so; they were restful, waiting for the promise when they would be clothed with power from on high. And we do well to wait for that, and not move without it. Going back for a moment to the rushing mighty wind, I occasionally meet those who would much like to have the kind of ministry that they had forty years ago, they complain that things are different. But, you see, they are trying to control and lead the wind. The
{253}
Spirit of God knows what is needed for our day. The dangers of forty years ago, and the character of Satan’s attacks forty years ago are not the same today. But the Spirit brings what is needed for the day in which we are. So that the Lord says seven times over, “He that hath an ear let him hear what the Spirit *says* to the churches”. It is not what He *said*, but what He *says*; it is the present thing, something that will last till the Lord comes. If we fail to hear what He says we shall not be fortified to meet what Satan is bringing in at the present time. For the Spirit’s work is to bring what we need at the moment to help God’s people.
Ques. May not the hardness of our hearts hinder that?
W.J.H. That is true, but the thing is to come into the current; that is the idea in this section, to come into the current of the Spirit’s movements.
Ques. It says, “there came *suddenly* a sound out of heaven”. Is there a sudden movement today?
W.J.H. Well, it all emphasises the sovereignty of the movement. It springs from divine Persons. There is a tendency in certain quarters, to complain that we do not do now exactly what was done ten or twenty or thirty years ago. What is meant really is that the
{254}
wind should not have blown any more since then. But the movements of the wind will continue. We might get out of the current, and then say, There is no wind. But the wind does blow, and many hearts are being strengthened by it. We want to come into that current.
Ques. Does not what you are saying involve a lack of submission? As we were seeing submission is the first essential.
W.J.H. So that the selection of Matthias immediately precedes this; that is, they submit to the sovereign selection of the Lord. We might have just a word about the cloven tongues of fire. We have already had the sound from heaven; that is the first feature. Then there is the mighty tempestuous blowing. Then we have seen that it filled the house, and now there appear these cloven tongues of fire, and it says, it sat on each one of them, which, I think, is a wonderful thing. The reference to the tongue is clearly the power to speak, the power to be here in testimony. And the Spirit of God is that for every one of us. The gift of the Spirit is what empowers us to be here in testimony for the Lord.
Rem. The sound precedes the tongues.
W.J.H. Well, that is the source of what may be said. What you are going to speak of is what you have heard. If we do not hear we have nothing to speak about. But
{255}
the reference to fire means that the testimony is to be rendered in self-judgment; the fire refers to the judgment of what is evil, and it is only as we are walking in self-judgment by the Spirit, as it says, “putting to death the deeds of the body”, @Romans 8: 13, that we can take our place in the testimony. The point here at the beginning was that it sat on each one, and the Lord wants each one in this, not the old brothers only, but the young brothers and the sisters too. It says, it sat on each one of them, having in view that each one of God’s people should be spiritual. And I am sure the Lord is seeking to bring that back. Instead of just one or two brothers who are spiritual in a meeting, the Lord wants to bring each one into it, and the Spirit is the power if we will allow Him to bring about spirituality in our hearts.
Ques. Would there be a connection between the filling of the house here and the odour of the ointment filling the house in John?
W.J.H. There is a connection; @John 12 in present application would be the result of this. The sound from heaven would bring such an appreciation of Christ into our hearts, if we listened to it, that we should be able to bring out of our affections such a response to Christ that the odour of the ointment would fill the house.
{256}
Rem. One would be what comes from heaven, and the other what comes from the earth.
W.J.H. Yes; from the affections of the saints. Mary had been listening to the sound from heaven. She sat at Jesus¬ feet and was listening to His word. We do that by listening to the voice of the Spirit, and the result in Mary was that she went and took the ointment, and brought it out and filled the house with the odour. I believe the morning meeting would contain that, if we were listening to the sound from heaven. The house would be filled with the odour of the ointment, of affections that are poured upon Christ.
{257}
FOURTH READING AT VALENCE
@Acts 2: 42 - 47; @Acts 4: 23 - 37
W.J.H. Time will not permit us to go through the first nine chapters as one had hoped, in detail, but we might touch a few outstanding features this morning and afternoon, features that I believe the Lord is bringing back. I trust none of our hearts will miss what the Lord is doing, for while the days are to be increasingly dark and difficult publicly, they are to be some of the brightest as we get near the end, so that one would like to suggest to us all, that the thing of greatest importance is to have part in what is of God at the end. The passage we have read in @Acts 2 brings forward certain distinct features; the saints are seen persevering in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles. They *persevere* in it. At all costs they were going on with it; they were not interested in any other teaching; they would have no part whatever in any other fellowship. And the Lord is bringing that back. We are not interested in any other teaching; it does not matter if it comes from the most intelligent university on
{258}
earth; it does not matter if it comes from traditions that date back from before Christ, from Confucius, or from Mahomet. At the end, we are only interested in the teaching of the apostles; we shut our ears to every other teaching. We shall miss our way, surely if we do not keep that attitude. The apostles represent the Lord; they are His accredited representatives; no one else has that place; their teaching is final.
Rem. The teaching of the apostles is found in the scriptures; we have no need to go elsewhere.
W.J.H. No; we have no need of any teaching that is not based upon the scriptures. So that in Timothy -- the scripture for the last days -- the apostle insists on the inspiration of scripture. He says, “every scripture”. He does not exclude Genesis; he says, “every scripture is divinely inspired and is profitable”, @2 Timothy 3: 16. One finds great joy in the way the Lord is endearing the scriptures to His own; they were never more precious than now, when Christendom is tearing them to pieces, and the doctrines of demons are taking their place.
Ques. In speaking of the doctrine of the apostles you are thinking not only of the doctrine of the twelve but also of Paul and all the scriptures?
{259}
W.J.H. Quite, I would bring in the whole of the scriptures. The apostle Paul says, “Let him that is spiritual acknowledge that the things that I write are the commandments of the Lord”, @1 Corinthians 14: 37. So that I would urge particularly for the young brothers and sisters, that they refuse even to read the teachings that spring from the mind of man, and accept as final the teaching of the apostles.
Ques. Would you say that the more we read the scriptures, the greater their authority over our souls becomes?
W.J.H. The apostle says to Timothy, “from a child thou hast known the sacred letters”, @2 Timothy 3: 15. He says they are to thoroughly furnish the man of God, to *thoroughly* furnish him; that is, he wants nothing else than what is contained in the scriptures. So that the scriptures are exceedingly important.
Ques. In saying that you are not excluding ministry which would be on the line of amplifying what we have in scripture?
W.J.H. What the Spirit says to the churches is the living opening up and unfolding of what is in the scripture; it is based upon the scripture, but has a living present voice. Then there is the apostles¬ fellowship or communion, which means that we are bound up together, each having a part together in
{260}
what is of God, in what has come to us through the apostles. At the beginning they had no other fellowship; not one of them would have joined any other fellowship, and that is what we want now; indeed the Lord is bringing it back.
Ques. The apostle Paul speaks of fellowship in other terms, but I suppose it would be the same fellowship?
W.J.H. It is different aspects of the same fellowship; there is the fellowship of God’s Son, and the fellowship of the Lord’s body, and the fellowship of His blood, but these are all features of this fellowship. But the point we want to see is that at the beginning there was only one.
Ques. And does not the thought of fellowship attach to our position on earth where there are other fellowships? We shall not need it in heaven.
W.J.H. The idea would not have a meaning if there were only one, as in heaven, but the fellowship protects us in a scene of evil and enemies. So that if fellowship with darkness, or fellowship with unbelievers presents itself as a temptation, we are saved by adhering to this; we persevere in the apostles¬ fellowship. That is exclusive. In Corinthians the apostle shows that you cannot have the two. He says, “what fellowship of light with darkness,
{261}
and what consent of Christ with Belial or what part for a believer along with an unbeliever”, @2 Corinthians 6: 15. It would be well to remember that in business; it would save us from much sorrow, and dishonour to the Lord’s name. It would be well to remember it in marriage. The fellowship of the apostles is exclusive of every other fellowship.
Ques. Do we see how far that fellowship goes in @Acts 4: 32: “And the heart and soul of the multitude of those that had believed were one”?
W.J.H. Quite; showing that they were a living organism not an organisation. Masonry is an organisation; it has no heart or soul. But the assembly is an organism with one heart, one soul and one mind. We are approaching the day when the beast will arise (indeed, the beginnings of it are here already), when men and women will have to die if they will not come into his fellowship, if they will not give their minds and their hands to contribute to his system. What will save us from that wicked system is truly accepting one fellowship which excludes every other on earth. Then, besides the fellowship of the apostles, they continued in the breaking of bread; they persevered in the breaking of bread. That is a wonderful feature of the last days of recovery. The real meaning of it was lost for ages, but it
{262}
is probably the most outstanding feature that has been recovered.
Rem. It is not described here as the Lord’s Supper.
W.J.H. I think the “Lord’s Supper” is more connected with public order, but the “breaking of bread” is more what is enjoyed in the hearts of the saints. It says the Lord was made known to them in the breaking of bread (@Luke 24: 35). That manifestation was not anything that could be seen with the natural eye. But in coming to the Lord’s Supper there *is* that which anyone can see; there is the loaf. Anyone can see that. Then there is the cup, out of which everyone drinks. There are not two. All drink out of one cup. It says, “they all drank out of *it*”, @Mark 14: 23. Anyone can see that. So there is the order of the Lord’s Supper, but when the Lord is known to our hearts in the breaking of bread so that we are conscious He is with us, nobody can see that. I think that is the idea of the breaking of bread.
Rem. The breaking of bread does not exclude the thought of the cup.
W.J.H. No; in @Acts 20 the disciples came together to break bread, which is the Spirit’s way of referring to the feast, and therefore must, of course, include the cup. I think the Lord is making the breaking of bread clearer
{263}
and more living to our hearts all over the world, and if we are prepared to follow the direction of His teaching, in our hearts and not merely in our minds, I believe He will give an ever-increasing sense of His presence in the breaking of bread. But, you see, the apostles¬ doctrine and fellowship must precede that.
Rem. Otherwise we shall not have it intelligently.
W.J.H. Indeed, and if we allow any other doctrine or fellowship there will be a condition to which the Lord cannot give His presence. Supposing, for example, I am a Freemason and I come to the breaking of bread, I am linking Christ and Belial together. Do you think I shall have a sense of the Lord’s presence? It is absolutely impossible. Then the apostles persevered in prayers. We shall need to pray more. As the days get darker and the power of Satan increases in the world, the outlet will be to continue in prayer, to pray more, in relation to the Lord’s holy interests. One is conscious that our prayer meetings are taking on a different character.
Ques. While they are said to have been “constantly in the temple with one accord”, it says that the breaking of bread was in the house (@Acts 2: 46). What is the meaning of that?
{264}
W.J.H. It is clear that for a little while there was not a complete break with the Jewish system. It is like the cloud gradually leaving the temple in the book of Ezekiel. But the breaking of bread was not in the temple but in the house.
Ques. What is the difference between the house and the upper room?
W.J.H. I do not think there is any difference in principle. It is just to separate the thought of the Jewish temple from where they broke bread. We come into a room so that it might be available to all, but if wickedness increases much more we may have to come together in houses in secret.
Ques. You are anticipating difficult times?
W.J.H. “Perilous times”, it says in Timothy, “shall come in the last days”, @2 Timothy 3: 1. But one would like to encourage the brethren, particularly as to their meetings for prayer. The Lord is lifting the meeting for prayer out of the limits of personal and individual matters which properly belong to our homes. The need for prayer as in this scripture, is for those burdened with the care of the Lord’s precious interests. The Lord loves these meetings, and He would give such a sense of His power there as He did here. We read “when they had prayed, the place in which they were assembled shook”, @Acts 4: 31.
{265}
Rem. It says that they persevered in prayers. Elsewhere you have the thought of prayer; there seem to be the two thoughts, the singular and the plural.
W.J.H. That is interesting. Prayer is the general attitude of dependence, as it says, “praying at all seasons with all prayer”, @Ephesians 6: 18. That is, we are always in the attitude of dependence on the Lord. But then there are also prayers, that is, direct requests laid upon our hearts which the Lord loves to hear. The prayers in the meeting for prayer ought to take that character, that is, the Lord has put one matter definitely on our hearts, or two or three. But those prayers that embrace everything, have very little real exercise in them. I do not think any of us are great enough to be really burdened as to everything at one time, but the Lord wants direct prayer, prayer for actual matters that we are concerned about as to His interests. So when Peter was in prison the saints prayed for him; they prayed mightily for him (@Acts 12: 5). And when the disciples were threatened and commanded not to preach in His name, they prayed about that, that the Lord would strengthen them and grant to His servants that with all boldness they might speak His word (@Acts 4: 24 - 30). The Lord loves those prayers; they go up to the throne of God as
{266}
incense -- a sweet and holy smell for God. One would like the prayer meeting to be like that.
Ques. You think, then, that a long prayer in the prayer meeting which embraces many things is rather a hindrance?
W.J.H. I believe it is a source of great weakness in the meeting, and it is not real. We know very well that we are not concerned about everything; our hearts are not big enough for that. The great apostle Paul could have the care of all the assemblies (@2 Corinthians 11: 28). He could pray night and day for many of the brethren individually, but we are not equal to that. Let us come with what the Lord has put upon our hearts and present that to Him, and He will love to hear it, and He will answer it.
Ques. Do you think long prayers hinder the Spirit from speaking in connection with other things?
W.J.H. They hinder other brothers from presenting their direct requests, and so, as our brother pointed out, the disciples persevered in *prayers*.
Rem. Speaking of the incense, it says in Revelation that each of the twenty-four elders had golden bowls “full of incenses, which are the prayers of the saints”, @Revelation 5: 8.
W.J.H. That is very good; they are full
{267}
of odours. Each prayer is an addition to the odour.
Rem. The psalmist says, “Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice”, @Psalm 141: 2. You would encourage what is vital rather than what is long?
W.J.H. That is the point. What a joy it would be if at the meetings for prayer, there were these beautiful odours going up to God; prayers that long for the Lord’s interests to be maintained, for His name to be glorified. God loves those odours. What a contrast to the awful smells that exist in the world, as it says of Egypt, “and the land stank”, @Exodus 8: 15.
Ques. Is your thought that each brother rightly exercised would bring in one ingredient for this incense? According to Exodus the incense was compounded of many ingredients.
W.J.H. I think that is very helpful. When the Lord prayed, there was always much incense. Take the prayer that He taught His disciples; what incense there is in that. Father, Thy name be hallowed. Think of a desire like that rising up from the earth, where His name has been blasphemed, and used in oaths and curses! Then He says, Thy kingdom come. He prays for a kingdom where God is absolute, where the will of the creature has no place
{268}
whatever, but where all is subject to God. What blessed incense!
Rem. The prayer of the disciples is addressed to God as “Sovereign”, and at the end the place is shaken.
W.J.H. That is very good. Indeed, He is recognised, too, as Creator. And God desires that as we draw near to Him there should be in our hearts a sense of His majesty as Creator. The apostles say, “Thou art the God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea”(verse 24). How great God is! There is nothing like His work, and we are to draw near to Him with the sense of that. He made heaven. Then He made the earth. And He made the sea. Men cannot create one drop of water. So that God would give us a sense of His majesty as Creator. We need that in drawing near to Him. “Holy and terrible is his name”, @Psalm 111: 9.
Rem. That would have been Abraham’s knowledge of God as the Almighty God. That must be behind all our prayers.
W.J.H. Quite; every fresh knowledge of God gathers up what has preceded; it does not leave it behind, but includes it. So that if we lose the sense of the Creator in our hearts, we may lose the joy of redemption, and the liberty of sonship. We need to remember that we are always creatures, and that God is always Creator. While there are blessings beyond, we
{269}
must never forget that He is the Creator. So that in @Revelation 4 the twenty-four elders fall down before God and say, “Thou hast created all things, and for thy will they were and they have been created”. Then in chapter 5 they fall down before God and the Lamb and say, “Thou art worthy  ... for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God”. But the two are continuous, and they should be continued in our hearts, so that we draw near to God with this in our hearts, that He is the Creator, who is blessed for ever. He is the redeeming God, and He is God our Father. We want these thoughts in our hearts and minds as we draw near to Him in prayer.
Rem. So in 1 Timothy, which treats of prayer, it is established that He is the invisible God (@1 Timothy 1: 17).
W.J.H. Quite so. He is the “King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God” So that Paul says, to whom be glory and honour for ever and ever.
Rem. It says that Peter and John went up together to the temple to pray at the hour of prayer, so that we have the thought of a special time for coming together. But there is also the thought of constantly praying.
W.J.H. Yes; they are both in scripture. Praying always is that you are always dependent, but then there is the thought of a place
{270}
where prayer is wont to be made, and the apostle Paul was careful to go there (@Acts 16: 13). It would be well for us to have the same care. The Lord would like to see us all where prayer is wont to be made, to add more to the holy incense that goes up to God.
W.J.H. I think we might touch on the end of chapter 4 where what comes to light is that at the beginning everyone was on the line of sacrifice. It says, “no one called anything he had his own”, @Acts 4: 32. In chapter 2 it says that they had all things common (@Acts 2: 44). The Lord was so precious to each heart, His interests so real to them, and His return so imminent. The two men had said that He was coming back again, and every one of them ceased to look on anything he had as his own, as simply for himself, as that with which to please himself, with which to gratify his heart. Every single thing he had, he held for the Lord and made it available as required. And the Lord wants that feature back.
Rem. At the last moment we shall need these things more and more.
W.J.H. Supposing the Lord whispered to your heart by the Spirit that you would not taste death till you had seen the Lord’s Christ, How differently you would view everything you had! Your body, you would put it on His altar. Your time, every minute you have to
{271}
spare devoted to Him. Your money, you would not hold it for yourself. Your home, it would be where His interests have a place. Your motor car, it would be not simply for yourself, but for the Lord’s interests. So it says, no one called anything his own. You have an impression of Christ, some ray of light from God? That is not for yourself; it is to share with your brethren. I believe that is what the Lord wants now, and He is getting it in many hearts. We want to be in that.
Rem. Features are coming to light such as were seen in Anna and Simeon.
W.J.H. That is what is happening, conditions that He can love. He says to Philadelphia, I will make them to know that I *have* loved thee. It is not that I *will* love thee after the rapture, but I *have* loved thee, here on earth. There is what is lovable to His heart. And that is what was at the beginning. The Lord looked down from heaven and saw here on earth a company of which He could say, that is “Me”. It is like a wife who is part of her husband. So it says, They are no longer twain, but one flesh (@Matthew 19: 5). In @Acts 9 the Lord looks down and He says, My bride is there; one that is part of Myself, one that I love. And the Lord will find that at the end. We want to be in that.
{272}
Ques. Is that suggested in the reference to Barnabas which is said to mean, “son of consolation”?
W.J.H. That is very good; Barnabas was one that had a name through sacrifice. In a world where self is the centre of everything that everybody does, here is a man who sells what he has and puts it at the Lord’s disposal. What consolation from a scene like this! Consolation for the Lord and for the brethren, for the apostles name him.
Ques. And do you think the Lord would add to a state of things like this?
W.J.H. Quite so; He would like to bring in three thousand in one day into that, and I expect He will add very distinctly at the end, if not in immense quantity, in true quality.
Rem. Speaking of drawing near to the throne of grace, we can bring all our requests with confidence.
W.J.H. Yes; there is an immense supply available if only we come to where we can get it.
{273}
FIFTH READING AT VALENCE
@Acts 5: 1 - 10; @Acts 5: 17 - 23; @Acts 7: 54 - 60
W.J.H. I thought it would be helpful to look at this section in chapter 5 first, following on what we have had together as to the first features of the church. This section as to Ananias and Sapphira would teach us that in the early church there was the absolute refusal of the exaltation of man under any pretence whatever. It is evident that Ananias and Sapphira wanted to use the offering that they brought, in order to get a name for themselves. The incident follows the naming of Barnabas, who, by surrender and sacrifice had been given a name by the apostles, a name which heaven would recognise. But Ananias and Sapphira wanted a name for themselves, but were not prepared for the sacrifice involved. The apostle Peter makes it perfectly clear that such an attitude merited unsparing judgment, and would not be tolerated in the early church. What a different history the church would have had if that had been maintained. Instead of great cathedrals, instead of men appearing as lords and treating their
{274}
flocks as their servants, there would have been only one name exalted in the church -- the name of Jesus. All other names of any real value such as the “son of consolation” would have been earned through a life of sacrifice and devotedness, for that is the only way names are secured according to God.
Ques. Would @Philippians 2 be in keeping with that?
W.J.H. That is very good; the One who has a name above every name is the One who became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. He became a bondman in order to carry out the will of God. God has given Him a name. That is the kind of name Barnabas got. Ananias wanted it, but he was not prepared for the sacrifice. A passage like this sweeps away the whole clerical system that has been built up. I believe the Lord would encourage us on that line, to judge continually in our hearts any idea of using the things of God in any way whatever to adorn ourselves, or to make a name for ourselves, or to call attention to ourselves.
Ques. Is that not a subtle attack of the enemy even after we have left the outward pleasures of the world?
W.J.H. Yes, the thing is to see that the assembly is for Christ, that all the glory is for Him.
{275}
Rem. It says, “he that boasts let him boast in the Lord”, @1 Corinthians 1: 31.
W.J.H. I feel we need to take account of this as coming out so strongly in the early church, that we do not in any way whatever touch divine things in order to get a name for ourselves, to appear publicly what we are not. The judgment that was executed may appear severe, but it was supported by heaven; it was the act of God that removed Ananias, but Peter was entirely in accord with it. He says to Sapphira, “the young men shall carry thee out”, though she was standing there before him, showing that Sapphira was affected by *his* word. When the people of Lystra wanted to worship Paul, he and Barnabas ran in among the people, and they said, Sirs, we are men like yourselves. They said, as it were, the exaltation is for God, for Christ, not for us (@Acts 14: 12 - 15). The angel in Revelation is in accord with that. John has such a sense of the greatness of the angel that he falls at his feet, but the angel says, “See thou do it not; I am thy fellow bondman, and the fellow bondman of thy brethren, the prophets”, @Revelation 22: 9. He says, I am a bondman, simply to do God’s will. God is master, Christ is master, anything else needs to be judged unsparingly in our hearts, in our associations. That is what marked the early church.
{276}
Now if we turn to the other section for a moment, we find that the opposition increases and the apostles particularly are forced into a position that seems hopeless. But what comes to light is that if we are doing the will of God, if we are living in His world, He will come in through His angels and find a way somehow for His people to get through. He may at times allow some to be martyred, such as Stephen and James, but if He wants to keep us here any longer He has an innumerable company of angels, as scripture says, “ten thousand times ten thousand and thousands of thousands.” No one can tell how many that is, and there they are waiting to do God’s will, to serve His people. That is what comes to light in the early church, and it is coming to light at the end, and as the hatred and opposition of man increases, faith can count upon it still further that God will come in by His mighty servants and open the doors so that we can go through.
Ques. Is that akin to what we find in Philadelphia?
W.J.H. It would include that. In that passage the Lord opens the door; He opens and shuts, He has the key of David. But then He uses His servants to do that, His angels. I think we need that today, and we shall need it more. We shall need that part
{277}
of the system of faith to which we are said to have come in @Hebrews 12 -- the innumerable company of angels, the universal gathering, available to God’s people everywhere. Everywhere this universal gathering is available, if we are moving in the system of faith. So that here in this chapter they take the apostles and put them in the inner prison and put the keepers at the door. But an angel comes, and what door can remain shut before an angel? What use are the keepers in the presence of an angel? So that somehow or other the apostles come out.
Rem. It is said that it was the sect of the Sadducees that put them in prison. What do you think about that?
W.J.H. They would be the infidels. The people were divided into two sections as they are today. There were the Pharisees, that is, the religious people who made everything of mere outward forms and were most careful to tithe mint and rue and cummin (@Luke 11: 42) yet leaving out judgment and the love of God. Very careful to wash their hands, but with no concern about washing their hearts. That is the character of the Pharisees. But the Sadducees deny the existence of the angels and ultimately of God. Here the opposition comes from the infidel, and God uses the angel to take out the apostles. There
{278}
is the door shut; there are the keepers standing, but the apostles are not inside. That is what God will do, and I think the Lord would waken us to that. He woke Peter up to it in chapter 12. Peter had been taken; James had been beheaded. Two soldiers guarded Peter, bound with two chains, and there was a great iron gate. The keepers are at the door and Peter is sleeping -- wonderful position for Peter to be in. Tomorrow Herod will take him out of the prison and behead him, but Peter is sleeping in confidence in God. The angel comes and the chains fall off; the door opens of itself and Peter is outside (@Acts 12: 6 - 11). That is what the angel can do, and God has more of them than we can number; they are ready to serve those who are in God’s world. They do not help us to make money; they do not help us to make a name for ourselves in the church, but if we are the Lord’s servants -- His bondmen, they are available to us to see us through. And as the hatred of man against Christians increases all over the world, the faith of this is needed in our hearts, and God will providentially make a way. We do not know how. We do not know in what way, but He *will* make a way, unless the time is come to remove us. If He wants to keep us here, He will make a way.
Ques. In the previous chapter it was Peter
{279}
and John who were imprisoned. Why is that?
W.J.H. We were noticing that that is the divine order. Peter represents the kingdom which means subjection to the Lord, but John represents the ministry of love. And you must have them in that order. There are the two elements, and the infidel would remove both -- subjection to the Lord and divine affections among the saints. They would like to shut them in prison.
Now when we come to the passage read in @Acts 7, one feels there is a voice for us at the end. The hatred and opposition increased to such an extent that they gnashed upon Stephen with their teeth; they rushed upon him; they stoned him. We may expect the hatred to increase, and it is increasing, even in the most isolated parts of the world. That spirit is extending all over the world. So that if the Lord leaves the church here we may expect to face increasing opposition and hatred. But Stephen’s death shows us how to meet it. We want to meet it at the end as it was met at the beginning, and the Spirit of God is the power to do it. It says, Stephen was full of the Holy Spirit; his object was in heaven, not on earth. His eye was upon Jesus. He stood his ground immovable. He was in keeping with the beginning. He
{280}
prayed; he continued in prayer. And he never departed from the spirit of Christ. Not one trace of hatred or enmity was in his heart. As they stoned him to death there was nothing in his heart but forgiveness for them. That is how the church met the opposition, the spirit of hatred and murder. It met it in the spirit of Christ, in dependence upon God, its eye looking into heaven. That is how Stephen departed. These are the features that enter into what the Lord meant when He said to Saul, Why persecutest thou Me? He recognised on earth a wonderful vessel that owed its origin to Himself, that was His body, that had His spirit, that was to Him what a wife is to her husband. So that He calls it “Me”. That is what the Lord will have on earth at the end. The Spirit and the bride say, Come.
Ques. Do you suggest that Stephen is the climax of this line?
W.J.H. I think Stephen was the completion of it in that way, because Saul was there witnessing it, and it is to Saul that the Lord said, You are persecuting Me. He had witnessed the “Me” as no one else had ever seen it, finding its climax in the person of Stephen.
Ques. Was it because of these features that the enemy would destroy him?
{281}
W.J.H. I am sure that is what he hates. When Christ was removed from the earth it might appear that that kind of man had disappeared, the Man of God’s pleasure, but here it is again, not now in Christ personally, but in His body. That is the meaning of “the church which is His body”, @Ephesians 1: 22.
It is in our bodies we express what we are. I cannot tell what a person’s spirit is, but I can see what a person is by his body, by his actions. And here is the body of Christ in which Christ expresses Himself. That is what the enemy hates.
Ques. Might not one say that because the Lord Jesus represented God, those who were His brethren after the flesh hated Him?
W.J.H. What Satan is ever against is the true representation of God here. You remember the two witnesses in Revelation in the character of Moses and Elias. When they were killed, then those that did it rejoiced and sent presents to one another. They have got rid of these features of Christ. But God raises them from the dead and carries them up to heaven (@Revelation 11: 1 - 13). So they have got rid of Stephen; the Lord Jesus has received his spirit. They got rid of Christ, but He was carried up into heaven. And that is what is going to happen to the church, bearing the features of Christ in a living way, it is going
{282}
to be caught up to heaven. What we have sought to bring before one another, are some of the features that mark this wonderful company that the Lord spoke of as “Me” and the Lord would bring back in a living way, and is bringing back, these living features in the church. One would say again that the great exercise for the moment is not to miss it, but to be in it livingly.
