{#DISTINCTIVE GLORIES OF CHRIST AND OTHER MINISTRY}
{5}
DISTINCTIVE GLORIES OF CHRIST
@Hebrews 1: 1 -- 6; @Luke 3: 21, 22; @Exodus 25: 10 -- 16, 26: 15 -- 19, 29; @John 17: 1 -- 5
One has been enjoying a little, dear brethren, the message of the angel to Mary in regard to the blessed person of Christ. You remember he said: “*He shall be great*.” One desires that the sense of that greatness might increase in all our hearts, so that the spirit of John the Baptist might be with us, for he said, as he looked upon the Lord, “He must increase.” If it involved that John must decrease, that did not concern him. “He must increase.” The Lord is going to increase until, dear brethren, He fills heaven and earth: There is no one like Him, is there? He has gone up, it says, far above all the heavens, that He might fill all things. The word “fill” is a wonderful word. It means there is no room for anything else. If a thing is filled, then nothing else can come in. There is no room. It will be true of Christ for all eternity, that He fills heaven and earth. So tonight, with the Lord’s help, one desires just to speak simply of
{6}
the Lord, in four ways in which He is unique in manhood. I wanted, dear brethren, to speak of four unique glories that are His in manhood, that He shares with no one. I think we love that; I am sure we do. Not that one would, of course, in any sense fail to appreciate what He shares with us! How much He shares with us! Think for a moment, beloved brethren, of what He shares with us! As the greatness of that dawns upon our hearts, it would only add to the delight we would have in seeing that there are glories that are His alone. For instance, He says: “Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you.” Speaking to the troubled hearts of His own at the moment (and to ours), He would convey to us that He would share His peace with us. He would share it with us, and fill our hearts with it. What a peace was His! We have often thought of it, for instance, on the lake. He proposes to cross to the other side, and in all the peace of His own blessed heart He sleeps. A storm arose, the wind rages, the waves would beat into the ship, but it says Jesus was sleeping on a pillow. Think of the comfort and peace and restfulness that was His amidst the storm! He says: I will share that with you. “My peace I give unto you.” Then, in another place. He says: “That they might have *My joy* fulfilled in themselves.” The joy that filled His own blessed heart as Man -- He says, I want you
{7}
to have that. I will share it with you. The joy that was not affected by the disappointments of this scene, for in the place of His rejection and despising, where His most marvellous works had been done, and not appreciated, it says: “In that hour He rejoiced in spirit.” His heart and spirit were filled with joy amidst the disappointments and sorrows of this scene. He says, I want them to have My joy. I will give it to them. He goes further. Speaking to the Father, He says “The glory that Thou hast given Me, I have given them.” I have given them the same glory that Thou hast given Me. The very glory that was given to Him, He says, I will share it with them. Think of the words: “The glory that Thou hast given Me, I have given them.” And, indeed, dear brethren, He says also in 14th John that He would share His own abode with us. He says: “In My Father’s house are many mansions (many abodes) ... That where I am there ye may be also.” He would share His own place with us. In the light of that, and much more also, let us look for a few moments at these four glories that are His alone that He does not share.
In @Hebrews 1: 4, I have particularly in mind the glory that is His as inheriting sonship. It says: “He has by *inheritance* a more excellent name than they.” For it says: “To which of the angels said He at any time. Thou
{8}
art My Son; this day have I begotten Thee?” -- pointing out, dear brethren, that He has the place of sonship *by birth*. No one else in the universe has that. No one. He is the only begotten Son, having that most blessed and glorious relationship by the right of *birth*. As the angel Gabriel said to Mary: “The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee ... therefore that holy thing ... shall be called the Son of God.” That is His alone. It is unique -- His glory as Son by birth -- begotten. That He shares that relationship with us is perfectly true, but He retains eternally His own unique place. We have the place of sons, but we have it by adoption. We have not it by birth. God, in His eternal purpose, has marked us out, it says, beforehand for adoption. It is according to His purpose to place us before Him in all the liberty and dignity and affection of sonship, but we have it every one of us (there are many sons) by adoption. The blessed person of Christ in manhood has it by birth. It is His in a unique and distinct form. You say, is it really sonship we have? It is really sonship. You see, God has done what no one else but God could do. I f I proposed to adopt a number of sons and place them in my home and before my heart and mind as sons, I could not in the very nature of things give them the feelings and instincts and affections of sons. I may place them there, but I cannot really make them sons, but God can. The
{9}
way He does it is that He takes the Spirit of His Son, and He puts that same Spirit into our hearts, whereby we cry: “Abba, Father.” If I had a son, and I could take the spirit of my own son by birth, and put it into the hearts of those I adopted, I would constitute them sons in very truth. That is what God has done. He has given us, as He says, the Spirit of His Son in our hearts, so that our place in sonship is real, true, and eternal by the gift of the Spirit of His Son in our hearts. But how the Lord stands out in His unique glory! By birth He is Son. He was begotten. “This day have I begotten Thee” is unique to the blessed person of Christ, and we adore Him in His unique glory.
Now the passage we read in Luke brings before our hearts another glory that is entirely His, and that is the character of His reception of the Spirit. The manner in which the Holy Ghost came upon Christ in manhood is entirely unique to Himself. It is remarkable that these details as to the coming of the Holy Spirit on Jesus are recorded more or less similarly in each of the four Gospels, to emphasise again and again to our hearts the importance of it; the greatness of it. The witness is that when Jesus was baptised, He prayed, and the heavens were opened, and the Holy Spirit descended, as Luke presents it, in a bodily form as a dove, and abode upon Him. Now I would like, with the Lord’s help,
{10}
that we should see the magnificence of that. The Spirit of God came upon Christ as a dove, and on Him only. That is confined entirely to Him. The reference undoubtedly goes back to the days of Noah. You remember that into the scene of death and darkness and corruption Noah sent out a raven -- a bird of prey, an unclean bird, a scavenger -- and it could find all it wanted in that corrupt and dark scene, so that it never returned. Then, it says, Noah sent out a dove. But the dove found no rest. The dove is a clean bird that could not find its home in anything that is defiling, in any element of corruption. The dove cannot rest. You can think of it as hovering over those awful scenes. It says, the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned to Noah. I believe that is what we should consider in this passage, that the Spirit of God, as a dove, can find no resting place, no abiding place, on anything that is corrupt. Where there is any trace of what is unholy, where there is any element unsuitable to His own nature, the Holy Spirit cannot rest. But when Jesus appears publicly, He comes and He abides on Him in the character of a dove. There is everything in that blessed Man that is entirely suitable to the Holy Spirit, so that, in the form of a dove, He comes and rests and abides there; John says: “Abode upon Him.” But then in Luke, another word is added -- “in bodily form” -- a most remarkable expression
{11}
to apply to the Spirit. You see, when the people of God were together (as recorded at the beginning of Acts), and the Spirit came, at the beginning of Christianity, there was no bodily form. You cannot conceive a bodily form in the rushing mighty wind. The mind of man cannot conceive such a thing as a bodily form in the wind. When you think of the Spirit in the character of living water, you have not a bodily form brought before you. When you have the Spirit as fire, you have no bodily form in, regard to fire. It is there, but not in bodily form; but when you think of Jesus, the Spirit of God descends, it says, in a bodily form, meaning that the Holy Spirit in its *entirety* was there. That is the idea of bodily form. The Spirit of God is there absolutely and entirely. God places His beloved people in the midst of the wind, but no one person is able to receive this rushing mighty wind. It is a power we can be in, but we do not receive it in its entirety. God would have us drink the living waters, that they may be in us a well of water. But we do not have *all* the water. No one person has *all* the water. God would have us know the Spirit as fire to enable us to judge in ourselves what is unholy. But we have not *all* the fire. He would have us in all the dignity of the anointing, of the oil; but no one has *all* the oil. But when you come to Jesus, He receives the Spirit in a bodily form. The
{12}
Spirit is there completely. In every view you may take of the Spirit -- as the Spirit of holiness, as the Spirit of life, as the Spirit of power -- all is there in entirety, all is in the Person of Christ. I believe that is what underlies the coming of the Spirit upon Jesus in a bodily form, and as a dove. It is entirely unique to Christ. We love to gaze upon this unique glory of Christ. While we are thankful to God for the gift of the Holy Spirit to us, we do not receive it in the same way as He received it.
When we come to Exodus, I want to say only a few words about that. The ark and the boards of which we read are remarkably alike -- there is much that is common to them both. *The ark* is made of shittim wood -- a figure of the incorruptible manhood of Christ, a character of manhood that *could not* be corrupted. What a wonderful kind of manhood that is! We were looking at it this afternoon, in the temptations; there came to light the shittim wood, a character of manhood that could not be corrupted. The word “incorruptible” is one of the most magnificent words in scripture. It does not mean that, up to the present moment, there is no corruption, but it means it *is impossible* to introduce corruption. That is what incorruptible means. That is what comes out in Jesus, a character of manhood that cannot be corrupted. So the apostle delights to say He has brought
{13}
life and incorruptibility to light. Where? In Christ! Incorruptibility is brought to light in that blessed, holy, spotless Man. But the boards are made of shittim wood also. The work of God is to conform us in our moral beings, in our hearts, to the character of manhood as seen in Christ. The apostle Paul evidently recognised that there was incorruption amongst the saints at Ephesus, for he says: “Grace be with them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption.” (@Ephesians 6: 24.) He sees there are incorruptible affections in the Ephesian saints -- affections that you cannot introduce corruption into. The shittim wood in the boards represents this feature. The ark is overlaid with gold, within and without, meaning that, in that blessed Person, the glory of God shines forth. Look at Him where you will, what shines out is the display of what God is. The gold is there, everywhere; the whole of His manhood is covered with it, the expression of what God is shining forth in His glory. The boards also are overlaid with gold. Every single board that stands up in the presence of God is overlaid with gold. It is a wonderful thing, is it not, that God is going to have a vessel -- God is going to have a city that *has* the glory of God. It says in @Revelation 21: “The city is of pure gold.” The whole city is pure gold. Everything you look on in that city speaks of. God. What a blessed thing that is! But there is one
{14}
great difference between the ark and the boards. The proper place of the ark, according to Scripture, is in the holiest of all -- right in the presence of God, the holiest of all. There it stands. What does it stand on? It stands on its own base. What does that mean? The blessed person of Christ as Man -- that wonderful Vessel, so outwardly small, so intrinsically great, stands in the immediate holy presence of God on the ground, on the basis of what He is personally, in Himself; on the basis of His intrinsic moral worth. The intrinsic worth and glory of His blessed person entitles Him to be in the immediate presence of God. But what of the boards? They are around. They form the tabernacle in this holy place. It says they stand up; the boards stand up! What a wonderful thing! What do they stand on? Every one of them has silver sockets. Every one of them typically has had to be redeemed. Every one stands there on the foundation of redemption, but the blessed Person of Christ as Man stands there in the holiest of all on the foundation of what He is Himself. You see it illustrated in the fourth and fifth chapters of Revelation combined. There is the throne set in heaven, and One sat on the throne, who was like a jasper and a sardine stone, speaking of the holiness of God who is light, for jasper speaks of light. In Him there was no darkness at all. He sits on that throne. And in the midst
{15}
of the throne and round about the throne were the four living creatures, full of eyes, which rest not day and night, saying “Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which, was, and is, and is to come.” The seven lamps are before the throne showing everything perfectly. The sea of glass is there. In the fifth chapter we read, “I beheld ... in the midst of the throne ... a Lamb as it had been slain,” standing right in the very midst of the throne of God. Albeit, the living creatures cease not day and night to say “Holy, Holy, Holy,” nevertheless, He can stand there amidst the lightnings, and thunderings, and voices -- all the evidences of holiness and judgment, but there is one blessed Person in manhood that can stand there on His own feet -- Jesus -- the Ark. Around the throne are the twenty-four elders sitting, but they tell you how they come to be there. They are there, too, in the full light of the “Holy, Holy, Holy” that continues day and night, in the presence of the seven lamps, that burn with fire in the presence of the sea of glass-like crystal, and under the eyes of Him who is like jasper. There they are sitting. But they tell us how they come to be there. They speak of redemption; they say of the Lamb: “Thou wast slain and hast redeemed us to God by Thy blood out of every people and nation.” That is how they can be there. That is how we are there. They are there because they have been redeemed. But He is
{16}
there because of His intrinsic right to be there, because He is the holy Ark. That is His glory.
Now, just a word as to @John 17. One feels one can say but little about it. The Son, there, is speaking to the Father. I think the greatest privilege that Scripture affords -- and it affords many -- is to listen to these holy utterances of Christ in His communion with the Father. He is speaking anticipatively. In His own blessed spirit, everything is past. He says: “I have finished the work, that Thou gavest Me to do.” He lifts His eyes to heaven and blesses the Father. He desires to be glorified so that He might continue to glorify Him. He says: “I have finished the work that Thou gavest Me to do.” Everything that He had entered manhood to do is over and completed perfectly. In His spirit, anticipatively, it is all finished. He says “Now glorify Me, Thou Father, along with Thyself, with the glory which I had along with Thee before the world was.” One feels that we are speaking of what is beyond us. But what I understand that to relate to is that the Lord Jesus I asks to receive back the glory which He had in the uncreated sphere. As to His own blessed Person, He was always *who He* was, but as to the glory of it, He had laid it aside. I believe that is what is referred to in Philippians as “emptying Himself.” The glory that was His in the past eternity He had laid aside. He had
{17}
emptied Himself of it. That glory was *equality* with God. “The glory that I had along with Thee.” He was there in that past eternity with God, on equality with God, and was God. The glory of that He laid aside. But now, having finished the work which He came to do, He desires to receive back the glory that was His in the past eternity. No one ever saw, and no one ever could see, this glory. It was before the world was -- before, dear brethren, God moved out in a mediatorial way to create anything -- there was this glory “along with Thee.” And the Lord says: “Glorify Thou Me with the glory which I had along with Thee before the world was.” I believe it means, dear brethren, that though still in manhood -- (the fact that He is asking for it shows He is speaking as Man) He is able to enter the unapproachable light -- that, as a blessed Man. He passes into the unapproachable light where God dwells. We worship Him as we see Him disappear from our gaze (or, as has been said, pass beyond our range). No one can follow Him; no creature could ever enter that unapproachable light. God, it says, dwells in light unapproachable, whom no one hath seen or can see, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen. But Jesus, in this wonderful scripture, in holy, spotless manhood, passes out of the range in which we can know Him, and enters the unapproachable light with the glory He had in
{18}
equality with God, while at the same time He remains in the mediatorial sphere for all eternity in the place of subjection. For the Son, it says, is placed in subjection to Him, who put all things in subjection to Him. You say, How can both be true? It is because of the unique and supreme greatness of this blessed Person. He can be with us as a blessed Man, where we can see Him and gaze upon His face, and talk to Him, as we were reading this afternoon, in the place of subjection, but He also can pass out of our gaze into the unapproachable light of equality with God. That is the glory. This was always true as to His Person, but He left the glory of it. The glory of it is distinct from the thing itself; He laid by the glory of equality with God, but He asks in this wonderful scripture to receive it back again; and we can all be assured that it was granted Him, for everything He asks for in this setting is granted, for He always asks for what is pleasing to the Father. One loves to see Him, dear brethren, in this wondrous light. It is a ray of glory that is delightful to one’s own heart, to see that, while He is still with us as Man, and indeed in this very prayer He says, “That they may be with Me and behold My glory which Thou hast given Me,” there is another glory which He receives, which entitles Him to pass as Man into the unapproachable light, where God alone is and where no creature
{19}
can ever enter. But we can, as it were, see Him pass into it, and every heart and spirit bows down in holy adoration and worship to the One who can enter (though still in manhood) the unapproachable light of the immediate presence of God on equality with Him. “Glory which I had along with Thee.” He enters that scene where no creature can come, though, at the same time, as I have said, He is with us, and we with Him; and He takes the place of subjection in that mediatorial sphere, and holds it all for God throughout eternity.
May the Lord add to our souls some distinct sense of the greatness of the One who would wax greater and greater until He becomes very great; and thus may we be fortified to meet the breaking up of this world with the conscious sense in our souls of the intrinsic and personal greatness of the One we know above.
{20}
“SENT”
@2 Kings 2: 1 -- 8; @John 14: 25, 26; @John 20: 19 -- 23; @Hebrews 1: 13, 14
One is confident, beloved brethren, that to some extent there is a desire in all our hearts in accord with the words of the apostle Paul, that whether present or absent we should be agreeable to Him (@2 Corinthians 5: 9, N.T.). I am sure we would not be the Lord’s at all, we would not know Him, if something of that desire were not with us -- to be acceptable to Him. The apostle says he laboured that whether present or absent he might be acceptable to Him. Nothing could be more blessed to the heart than to be consciously acceptable to the Lord. So I would like to suggest a few things without which we shall never be in accord with heaven, and never be acceptable to the Lord. I am sure that our spiritual histories are greatly affected by accepting definitely the control of the Lord. Christians that live their lives without the sense of obligation to the Lord and to His people never move forward very far. One observes it everywhere in every local company that those who have the sense of obligation in their hearts are those who prosper. Those that just come and go, more or
{21}
less as onlookers, never get very far, never get much of the positive enjoyment of things; and certainly are never trusted by the Lord with anything particular to help His people. What one has in mind is to suggest a little that might help us to accept definitely -- each one of us -- the principle of obligation to the Lord, so that in our lives here until the Lord comes, we accept this position that we are *sent*. You see a man (or a woman) that is *sent* is not at liberty to do as he likes; he is not at liberty to go where he likes; he is not at liberty to read what he likes; he is not even at liberty to think what he likes. You see, as being *sent* he is under the control and direction of another, and one does have some desire that we all might come to it that our position in relation to the Lord and in relation to God is that we are *sent*. That is the position He wants us to take up. I am sure light comes thereby. We look at everything differently in the acceptance of that principle. You remember the man in @John 9. He was in darkness. There were wonderful things going on around him; the greatest things that have ever happened were going, on. “The Word was God,” it says in @John 1: 1; and “And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us” (@John 1: 14, N.T.). The apostle says: “We have contemplated His glory.” John the Baptist looked upon Jesus as He walked; but there is a man that is blind. All
{22}
these things and more were going on around him, and he had not the faintest conception of it. But what I want us to see is that he is able ultimately to see everything rightly. His whole outlook is revolutionised by washing in the pool of Siloam, which, being interpreted, the Spirit of God says (it is interpreted so that we should not miss the meaning of it) is “*sent*.” The meaning of “sent” comes home to him; he washes in that pool. Then the light of the whole position dawns upon his soul. One desires, dear brethren, that we might wash in that pool tonight and afresh get our vision clear as to what is of God; and if there is one who has never washed, the Lord says, dear friend, go to the pool of Siloam and wash. This man said, I went, and I washed, and I came seeing. I am sure if we accept the principle behind that great word “sent,” our eyes will be opened to see what God is doing, and indeed to see the glory of Christ, as that dear man’s were. He worships the Son of God. That is where it ends. He comes into the shining of such a glorious Person as the Son of God, and worships Him. You can see I am sure that God’s dealings have always been on that line. When God wants to move, He has always moved on the line of sending. How many servants He has, has He not, ready to send? It says in @Daniel 7: 10, “Thousand thousands ministered unto Him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood
{23}
before Him,” and every one of them waiting for a word to be sent. One loves to think of those hosts (@Psalm 103: 21), “Ye ministers of His that do His pleasure” waiting for a word to be sent anywhere, as God instructs. And so God has always approached men like that. It says of Joseph that He sent a man before them. God sent him. Think of Joseph going like that. He was sent, consciously sent as he himself indicates. He said: “Do not grieve; God sent me before you to preserve life.” Joseph travelled from his father’s house, right to the throne of Egypt as the *sent* one, sent by God, consciously so. He was ready to go at the divine behest. So with Moses. He asks, when they say “What is His name? What shall I say unto them?” And God said unto Moses: “Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you.” (@Exodus 3: 13, 14.) Moses came from God to Israel in Egypt as “sent.” @Joshua 24: 5 says: “I sent Moses also and Aaron.” You find that with all the prophets. God says to Samuel: “How long do you mourn for Saul? I have rejected him. I will send you to Jesse, the Bethlehemite” (@1 Samuel 16: 1). “I have found a man amongst his sons. I will send you to Jesse.” Thither Samuel goes. That is it you see; the man who is sent goes and carries out his mission. God has acted like that. I think it is six times recorded in Jeremiah that He rose early and
{24}
sent the prophets; daily in one place. Think of God speaking like that to His people! He had risen early and sent His servants the prophets to them in His care, and His service towards them. So you find that line maintained all through the Old Testament, right up to John, where you find a man sent from God whose name was John. “Behold, I will send My messenger, and he shall prepare the way before Me ... “ (@Malachi 3: 1.) John comes on his mission as sent by God to prepare the way. That brings us to the Sent One. That is what I want to come to. God gathers up all that He had ever expressed from Joseph right to John the Baptist, and indeed much more, and He brings in that blessed One who is said to be “Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent”; and again of whom it is said “The Father sent the Son, as Saviour of the world.” (@1 John 4: 14, N.T.)
I wanted to commend the Lord to us all as the “Sent One,” so that we might be prepared to be sent; coming under the wonderful blessed fact that the Lord Jesus took the place as the sent One, and maintained it every day here, prepared to go wherever He was sent. He would not stay in one city all the time. He said I must preach the gospel in other cities for therefore am I sent. He never considered Himself, but carried out the mission which had been committed to Him, for He took the Servant’s form, and became obedient
{25}
unto death -- became obedient -- that is the place of a sent one. The sent one is simply to carry out the will of the one who sends him, whatever it may mean.
I thought we might get some help, looking at second Kings like that. Elijah is undoubtedly there as a figure of Christ, and in those few brief words there is the summing up of the great mission of Christ. He says: “The Lord hath *sent* me to Bethel.” “The Lord hath *sent* me to Jericho.” “The Lord hath *sent* me to Jordan.” Will he go? Nothing could stop Elijah from going. He tests Elisha. He says: “You stay here, but the Lord hath sent me to Bethel.” One would like to feel that the answer of Elisha was our answer. “As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee.” One loves to think of Elisha following Elijah like that in the spirit of adoration. With what profound feelings he would follow that one here who was going to heaven. He knew it. He was in reality going to heaven, typical of Christ in that way. It says, “When the Lord would take Elijah to heaven,” Elisha knew it. He knew the one he was following belonged to heaven and was going to heaven, as it says of the Lord in @John 13: “He was come from God, and went to God.” Knowing that, He rises from supper. In the light of the greatness of the one he was following, Elisha says: “I will not leave thee.” He followed
{26}
Elijah to these three places. We are not told what happened in detail, but one can fill in the detail from the New Testament. We can all do that. “The Lord hath sent me to Bethel.” That was one place the Lord was sent to. He was sent to Bethel. How we love to follow Him there! Bethel is the house of God. He was sent there. In being sent into this scene as the sent One, one place to which He was to go by the divine command, the divine injunction, was to Bethel. How beautiful to see the Lord in Bethel -- in the house of God! How He fills the picture! How He fills the scene! We can follow Him there. See the “zeal of thine house” devouring Him! See Him make those whips of small cords and cleanse the temple, saying, “Take these things hence; make not My Father’s house an house of merchandise” (@John 2: 17). God grant that we might be with Him as we see Him do that, to allow the zeal of the house of God to enter into our hearts; that we refuse to make the house of God a house of merchandise. How obnoxious it is to divine Persons that the house of God should be a house of merchandise, where people trade and make gain for themselves! The Lord would not tolerate it. It says: “He drove them all out of the temple.” We can stand alongside Him like Elisha, and watch Him, and let the same spirit enter into our hearts, that we will not allow in the house of God the principle
{27}
of making gain out of the things of God. We need to be with Elijah at Bethel to get the sense of that. We follow the Lord to the golden altar in the house of God, and we hear Him pray: “My house shall be called the house of prayer” (@Matthew 21: 13). What a wonderful thing it is that some of the prayers of the Lord are recorded, even verbatim, for our adoring hearts to hear. “My house shall be called the house of prayer for all nations.” How can we be in the house of God rightly? Only as like Elisha, we follow Him to Bethel, and we see Christ there. He was sent to Bethel. See His behaviour in the house of God. Never was such behaviour since the house of God appeared on the earth. So every feature of the house of God was adorned by His presence there. @Psalm 42 speaks of the Lord saying: “I went with them to the house of God.” Think of Judas going up with Him and being unaffected by his sojourn at Bethel. One would like to be like Elisha, to go up with Elijah and not to leave him. “And they two went on.” Elijah says: “Tarry here, I pray thee; for the Lord hath sent me to Jericho.” That means that Elijah is going to Jericho. As God’s servant whom He rises early and sends, He will carry out the will of the Lord. “The Lord hath sent me to Jericho.” We are not told in detail there what happened. The Gospel of Luke largely
{28}
fills that in. We see the blessed Lord going down to Jericho sent there. It says of the priest (@Luke 10: 31) that he *happened* to pass that way; passing the man that went from Jerusalem to Jericho. There was no such thing about the Lord; He was *journeying*. You see He was on this journey that God had sent Him. As He journeyed, He came where he was. One would like to be like Elisha, alongside the Lord in Jericho, and see that vessel of divine grace in Jericho in the scene of man’s lawlessness and wickedness and ruin. See how He acts in Jericho. Think, dear brethren, of Him journeying, and He had with Him the oil and the wine. It was in His charge. He was carrying it so as to be able to meet every need on the road to Jericho. It does not appear that the Samaritan had to go and buy the oil and the wine. He had it and poured it in. He had plenty evidently. He had all the means of providing what man in his ruin needed. Then, as He entered Jericho, there was a blind beggar, and the Lord has all that He needs to provide for the blind beggar. Think of the grace of it. This blind beggar cries out: “Jesus, Thou Son of David, have mercy on me.” It says He stood still to heed the cry of need from a blind beggar at Jericho. How are we going to move through this lawless, ruined, empty and broken scene? It is as we accompany the Lord to Jericho that we will know how to
{29}
have grace for man in his ruin. That is the only way. We will only know how to behave in the house of God as we are with Him at Bethel; only know how to have grace for the need of men around us as we accompany the Lord to Jericho. He came to the city of Jericho, and there was a man who wanted to see Him, making plenty of mistakes, climbing up the sycamore tree, but still in his heart he wanted to see the Lord. The Lord, full of grace, going to that city; looks up, and says: “Make haste and come down.” He sees Zacchaeus, and says, “Make haste and come down; for today I must abide at thy house.” What grace on the part of the Lord! We have much to learn from the Lord’s sojourn in Jericho. May our language be like Elisha’s: “As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee,” so that we may learn how to be in Jericho rightly.
Then Elijah says: “Tarry I pray thee here; for the Lord hath sent me to Jordan.” What a journey! What a commission! The Lord hath sent me to Jordan. What an amazing thing that the Lord should send him to Jordan. We must dismiss entirely from our minds at this point, another side of the truth which it is well at other times to remember; for the apostle Peter says, “Of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers” (@Acts 7: 52). That is not the point before us now. “*The Lord* hath sent me to
{30}
Jordan.” Jordan is the great figure of death -- death in all its power; death that overflows, like Jordan, all its banks. Scripture speaks of the swellings of Jordan (@Jeremiah 12: 5; @Jeremiah 49: 19). Think of the Jordan rising up and swelling and overflowing every barrier! Elijah says: “The Lord hath sent me to Jordan.” The blessed Lord Jesus Christ, the true Elijah was sent, dear brethren, wonderful to relate; He was *sent to die*. “Thou hast brought me into the dust of death” (@Psalm 22: 15). The Lord was sent into that river. We would follow Him adoringly. Think of the Lord being sent -- the Lord Jesus Christ, sent into that mighty river at the behest of God. Elisha followed Elijah. He sees him take his mantle and fold it up and smite the waters. They part hither and thither, and they cross over. What a place the Lord would have in our hearts if we did that! To follow Him at the close of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, and see Him stand by that mighty river! See it swell up and overflow everything! Death is there in every aspect. All the power of death is there. It was not *all* at the Red Sea, but it was *all* at the Jordan. See Him take His mantle and smite it. What is His mantle? The blessed character of Christ as Man, superior in virtue of His own blessed character, superior to every feature of death, in the power of what He was Himself,
{31}
in the power of all that is seen in Him; for His mantle refers to what you can see. It is not what is inside exactly; the mantle is what is wrapped round the person visibly, what is visible in the blessed Lord, those moral excellencies that make Him superior to death in virtue of which He can smite it and pass over, superior to Satan’s, power, superior to the hatred of men, superior to the judgment of God, superior to death in every form. I want to point out that He was *sent* there. Think of the obedience of the One who went wherever He was sent, even if it meant obedience unto death -- even the death of the cross!
Now, when we come to @John 14, we have another wonderful expression. It speaks there of the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, “whom the Father will send in My name.” There is another divine Person on earth now. Elijah goes up to heaven. Then comes the spirit of Elijah into the heart of Elisha. So the Lord says -- “the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will *send* in My name.” That is repeated half a dozen times at least in Scripture, that the Spirit of God is *sent*. The Lord says, I will pray the Father, and He will send you another Comforter. Peter says: “By them that have preached the gospel unto you with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven” (@1 Peter 1: 12). That
{32}
divine Person has taken the place of being *sent*. How it would help us to judge the lawless movements in our own hearts to do as we like, to see that the blessed Lord Himself is sent, and the Spirit of God is sent, sent down from heaven! Will He fail in His mission? Never. I believe that is what the meaning of the Comforter is. “I will send you another Comforter.” What a comfort it is to feel that there is even a Divine Person here, sent from heaven to care for the interests of Christ! “I will send Him in My name,” in My interests, on My behalf. What would we do if that were not true! Think of the unfaithfulness of the church! Think of all our unfaithfulnesses! How many they are! Everything would disappear from the earth for God if the Comforter were not here. He has been sent, and He will carry out His mission; He will never turn back until His service is completed. One has enjoyed the word “*another* Comforter.” What a Comforter the Lord was, was He not? The word does not mean there, as in the gospel of Luke, the Lord having compassion, and saying: “Weep not.” It does not mean that at all in the gospel of John. It means that He was competent as here to take up everything that ever arose. The word is the same as the word “advocate.” We know if we have ever been in a legal difficulty what it is to have a good advocate. That is the comfort. You feel
{33}
things are in good hands if you have the best advocate you can have. So in every matter that arose, what a Comforter the Lord was! What an Advocate! You think of @Luke 10. Martha comes to the Lord and complains about Mary. “Do you not care that my sister has left me alone to serve?” But Mary does not have to take up the matter. The Advocate is there, you see. Mary has not got to answer. The Lord takes up the matter. He says: “Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things.” He is such an Advocate that Mary is comforted to leave her interests in His hands. So you find that all the way through. Mary is again complained about. Why was not this ointment sold, says someone; why this waste? Mary has not got to answer the matter. The Advocate says, the Comforter: “Let her alone, against the day of My burial has she kept this!” He speaks for her; He takes up all matters. You find that all through the gospels. All matters of difficulty He takes up. They did not have to fight them out. The Lord says: “I will pray the Father and He will send you another Comforter.” One delights to think of the Spirit of God being here like that to take up and care for the interests of Christ. Oh, you say, if we do not do something, everything will fail and fall to pieces. No, it won’t. What are they going to do in such and such a place? We will have to do something,
{34}
somehow. Indeed you need not. The Comforter is here. The interests of Christ are in His hands. He is a Divine Person. You do not need to be alarmed. I do not mean to say you are not to be concerned and exercised when things are wrong. But you don’t need to think everything will fall to pieces. I will pray the Father, and He will send you another Comforter. “He will come in My name.” The Spirit of God is sent here and will carry out His mission faithfully to the end. That is why things that are wrong, dear brethren, never drift into oblivion -- they are never passed over. If a thing is wrong in any locality on earth, if it is a dishonour to Christ, it will never get through. You say: “Brethren at the other end of the world do not know.” I say it has no hope whatever of passing. Why? Because the Comforter is here “in My name.” He is here to take up the interests of Christ, and He sees everything. He will not pass anything that is dishonouring to Christ. You can be sure of that. You need not think it depends upon you and me, though we should be faithful, but it does not depend upon us. Any action or doctrine that is dishonouring to the Lord never does pass. There will be a division over it before it could pass, if people will not judge it; but the Spirit of God will not allow anything dishonouring to Christ to pass amongst those who desire to please the Lord. That is a comfort. That is the bearing
{35}
of the Comforter. “I will send you another Comforter.” There is much more. “He shall glorify Me and take of the things of Mine and show it unto you.” How is it there is a living ministry maintained to the end amongst God’s people? It is because the Comforter is here. “He shall glorify Me; for He shall receive of Mine and shall show it unto you.” It does not come from the brains of men; it does not come from the universities; it does not come from education according to this world, but “words which the Holy Ghost teaches.” The Spirit of God is here on behalf of Christ. He will see the saints are fed. What a comfort that is!
One more word or two. I wanted us to see that the Lord’s thought is to *send us*. The Lord in @Luke 10 calls 70. He had previously sent out the 12. Then He calls 70. You and I might come into the 70. We are not in the 12; that is peculiar to the apostles. Then He gathers 70 others. He says: “I send you forth as lambs among wolves.” I *send* you. Every one of that 70 would move out from that moment with the sense that they were sent, and that henceforth they were under obligation to the Sender. They were to move as He moved (in the gospel of Luke) like a lamb in the midst of wolves. You say: “How”? In the power of the Sender. The Lord does not send us on any mission we cannot fulfil, because He gives the power. He is the
{36}
vessel of divine power for men -- power unlimited resides in Him. Out of that fulness of power He gave the 70 the power to go on the mission. He says, “I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions”; “Carry neither purse nor scrip nor shoes.” You do not have to go stocked up. You want to go in dependence like a lamb. A lamb is dependent. What can it do if it does not depend upon someone? So the Lord is like that in Luke -- as the lowly dependent one -- so often seen in prayer in the gospel of Luke as the dependent one. He says: “I send you.” I am here; you do not need purse or scrip. I will provide what you need. I have sent you. Do not wear sandals. That is, you are to go as a servant. He says: “I am among you as he that serveth.” The Lord sent them out. One desires that from the youngest to the oldest we might accept that place that the Lord’s mind for us is to be sent with an inevitable obligation always to the Sender. Nobody would have a servant who was sent and did not take account of his mission. So the Lord says to the 70, which embraces all: “I send you forth as lambs among wolves.”
Now a word as to @John 20 -- another side altogether, in keeping with that wonderful gospel. The Lord, like Elijah, was just about to go into heaven. “I ascend,” He says, “to My Father and your Father”; but before He actually ascends He gathers His own round Him, and says: “As
{37}
My Father hath sent Me, even so send I you.” You say: “I could never be up to that.” None of us could in ourselves. No one could in himself. “As My Father hath sent me” -- what a wonderful, dignified position that is! “As My Father hath sent Me” -- in all the unspeakable greatness and dignity and liberty and heavenly character of the Son -- that is how He was sent. “The Father sent the Son.” In John’s gospel, how often it is repeated. It says: “He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father.” Think of the majesty and heavenly character of the “sending” in John’s gospel: The Lord says: “As My Father hath sent Me, even so send I you.” “I send you just like that.”. Every one of us would shrink back and say: “I never could undertake the journey; if I am sent like that, I am not equal to it.” The Lord knew we were not equal to it. It says: “And when He had said this He breathed on them, and saith unto them, ‘Receive ye the Holy Ghost.’” I believe that is one of the greatest acts recorded in Scripture. It stands at the head of the heavenly family in the same position as God breathing into Adam, who was the head of the earthly family. God says: “Let us make man in our image ... on the earth” (@Genesis 1: 26). How can He do it? He is out of the ground. It says: “The Lord God formed man out of the ground.” Something out of the ground could not represent God. The cows are
{38}
out of the ground; the sheep are out of the ground; the trees are out of the ground. They could not represent God as God’s image. How can man represent God? It says He breathed into his nostrils. God imparted something from His own being that elevated man to be able to represent God on earth. It is the most marvellous act, in connection with the creation, of all the acts -- that is what makes the difference between man and beasts, that man has had the breath of God breathed into him by God. Now the Lord says: “I want you to be here as heavenly, not as earthly, to be representative of God in an earthly setting, but I want you to be on earth in a heavenly character.” “As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly” (@1 Corinthians 15: 48). “I send you out as heavenly ones.” How could it be possible? He breathed into them the breath of life of the heavenly Man. That is what the Spirit of God is in that connection. It is the very breath of Christ imparted to the believer once and for all; for neither in Genesis nor in John is it ever repeated. It passes down in the first case through the history of man on earth, and in the second case it permeates the heavenly family. The breath of Christ is that which makes the person heavenly.
One word more -- I wanted us to see that the angels are *sent*. The apostle says, “Are they not all ministering spirits, *sent* forth to minister to
{39}
those who shall be heirs of salvation” (@Hebrews 1: 14). I believe that would give us great quietness at the present time to see that these hosts, innumerable, are sent out by God, and they never rebel. His holy angels they are. They are sent out to serve those who shall be heirs of salvation. You see that in the Old Testament. Listen to the voice of Daniel from the lions’ den. “My God hath sent His angel.” What can all the lions do when one angel arrives? Then see Peter in prison. How can those doors ever be opened? He will never get out. He says, “Now I know of a surety that the Lord hath sent His angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod” (@Acts 12: 11). See Paul in the shipwreck. You say: “Everything has gone now.” No, it has not gone. The apostle Paul says, “For there stood by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve” (@Acts 27: 23). You say, dear brethren, the avenues are closing up everywhere; the power of evil will crush the saints; there is no outlet anywhere. Yes, there is. “Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth to minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation?” God has hosts of mighty servants, and He sends them out, and they will do the divine bidding. The angels are sent in God’s providential government to make iron gates open when they are shut, to shut lions ¬ mouths when they are open, to see that God’s people get
{40}
through, and with the sense of that we can rest like Peter. Peter was sleeping with confidence in God, and he awakes to realise God has sent His angel. I am sure we shall have that experience if we keep in subjection to the Lord, for it is to those who shall be the heirs of salvation they are sent.
Do not think salvation means that we are going to heaven when we die! It is connected with the acceptance of the authority of the Lord over us. Those who shall be heirs of salvation, and who accept the authority of the Lord -- for such the angels are available. They are innumerable. No one knows how many. No one could know. Gabriel said to Zacharias, “ ... I am sent” (@Luke 1: 19).
The Lord help us. If the Lord Himself is the sent One, if the Holy Ghost is sent down from heaven, if the apostle Paul accepts the place of being sent (as he does, for it says, “Unto whom now I send thee” (@Acts 26: 17), if the angels are all prepared to be sent, let us live the rest of our lives in the definite acceptance of the place of obedience and obligation to the Lord who sends us!
{41}
FEATURES OF MAGNIFICENCE (1)
@Luke 1: 5 -- 23; @Luke 2: 22 -- 40
W.J.H. I thought it might be helpful if we looked at three or four features that the Spirit of God brings forward as marking that which was so delightful to heaven at the coming of Christ. While surrounded by a great deal that was obnoxious to God, and which He would judge, yet in the way Luke presents things, the Lord is received suitably, in an atmosphere suitable to Him. I felt there was a great deal of correspondence to the position we are in today, that while there is that which the Lord will spue out of His mouth as being so abhorrent, there is, I am sure, and there will be right to the moment of His coming, that which heaven delights in. As is seen in Malachi, there is that which remains, so much so that it says a book of remembrance was written, to permanently establish a record of that which was so pleasing to God in those days. While I had no thought of going into many of the details, I was struck with the way the Spirit of God brings forward the existence and reality of the temple as being preserved in the midst of the breakdown, and with that the
{42}
remarkable devotedness coming to light on the part of those who were in touch with God. And the third feature I felt the Lord might help us to look at is the definite recognition and power of the Spirit of God as seen at the end. Those three things were in my mind. I am sure the Lord would help us to be preserved in that which the temple represents, so that there should be an increase of devotedness, and a more distinct recognition and giving of place to the Spirit of God. These being three of the great features to which the Lord came first, and to which He will come when He comes again.
A.G.F. What is the distinction between the temple and the house? Was that in your mind in speaking of it? We read: It *groweth* to a holy temple.
W.J.H. I think the main thought connected with the house of God is that it is the place where God dwells, and where He is known. But with regard to the temple, while that thought is included, yet it emphasises also the particular feature of holiness and magnificence. Both these thoughts attach to the house of God also, but perhaps are more prominent in the temple. When you think of the house of God, you have in mind the place where God dwells and is known, but when you think of the temple you think, as the prime thought, of a structure that
{43}
is exceedingly magnifical and awe-inspiring. There was that here in @Luke 1 and 2 that was morally magnificent as in accord with the temple.
R.H.V.A. That which will be carried into the world to come is also set forth in the temple.
W.J.H. Yes.
C.B. The temple is in relation to the kingdom.
W.J.H. Yes. It has that connection with us. One was concerned a little with the maintenance of what heaven would regard as magnificent.
R.H.V.A. Does the application of the magnificence today lie in the essence of the thing or in the exterior?
W.J.H. In the essence. We may not see anything externally, but the thing is here, and it is interesting to see how the Spirit of God brings forward the temple without any comment as to the literal state, because I believe what the temple represented morally and spiritually was there.
A.G.F. You have the thought of what the saints are to God.
W.J.H. In @Isaiah 60: 7, it is spoken of as “the house of my magnificence” (N.T.).
C.B. How does that apply at the present moment?
W.J.H. It applied literally in the gold and the silver and the brass and the iron and the
{44}
wood and the glistening stones that all went into it. If you walked into the temple, you would see the wood covered with gold. You would get a sense of what a magnificent place it was. I think the temple is intended to impress us with the sense of what true magnificence is.
R.H.V.A. Is that suggested in Philadelphia “Thou hast not denied my name”?
W.J.H. That is very good. “I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God.” He will have a place in that wonderful structure.
C.B. How are you going to apply that in regard to the saints, as to the magnificence of the thing? How does it work out for us? Paul, writing to the Corinthians, speaks of them as the temple of God. They were that characteristically, I suppose, but as to the magnificence of what you speak, how is that viewed in the saints today?
W.J.H. I suppose it is by the presence livingly amongst us of what was set forth by the materials of which the temple was made. You could not have any magnificence without gold or without silver or without brass. Then there was the iron, beyond weight. There were the cedar trees and the fir trees and the glistening stones, the stones to be set, and all manner of precious stones. All these you would look for. The Lord maintains
{45}
(one would encourage our hearts) true magnificence on earth as in the previous dispensation.
A.G.F. That is in moral features.
W.J.H. Surely.
G.G. Do you think they were found in Zacharias?
W.J.H. He was in the temple.
G.G. I thought the sixth verse (@Luke 1) implied that.
W.J.H. Yes. He was a man who could burn incense. It was his lot to do it. He had liberty to do it, and he did it; so that from the temple of God there came up to God this incense. That is magnificent -- true magnificence -- that from the earth there should arise to God a savour of the incense.
Rem. It was pleasing to God. Noah was pleasing to God.
W.J.H. It says of Noah’s offering that God smelt a savour of rest.
J.S.B. You spoke of holiness as the first feature marking the temple, and it is in that character that the Lord addresses Philadelphia -- would you say more about that? Is it not holiness the enemy is attacking?
W.J.H. You could not have any real magnificence without holiness. You could not have
{46}
any real greatness without holiness. Nothing is great in the sight of God that is unholy. It *is* in the sight of men. Men have greatness that they value, and they do not question the moral character of a person regarded as great. Take a hero, for instance. No one questions his moral condition. You could not have that in the sight of God. You must have holiness.
H.C. Is that what we get in @Ephesians 2: 21: “Fitly framed together ... . “?
W.J.H. Yes. That is one of the great thoughts of the temple. It is all united together -- hence the iron for nails secured by David. In the house of God you are at home, and it is where you know God and enjoy His company. When you come into a temple, it is a shrine, a sanctified place.
J.H. The temple is greater than the house?
W.J.H. No, I would not say that. It is a distinct thought. It is intended to impress you with magnificence. It is a great thing that God dwells with men. You cannot *compare* one thought with the other. The temple is intended to impress us with holiness and what is magnificent according to God.
W.A.P. Would you say the magnificence is not visible to the eyes of men of the world?
{47}
W.J.H. It is not what the world calls magnificence, but I believe they ought to see it. I believe what is truly great according to God ought to be visible in Melbourne.
R.H.V.A. I thought that what was suggested there in the simplicity of the form of a babe -- all the magnificence that belonged to the temple -- was only awaiting display.
W.J.H. So that David proposed to build the temple in the first instance purely and simply to receive the ark. He would build a house for the ark. The ark was Christ in lowly, small conditions, but in His infinitely great and holy person; that wonderful building that took so long to build and cost so much was simply constructed to receive the ark. That is what existed here. There was a condition on earth of such true greatness that the ark could be received. Simeon received Him in his arms. He received Him suitably.
C.B. The temple is not said to be built when we come to the New Testament teaching. It grows. I was thinking of what our brother said as to the conditions being agreeable to God being seen in that Babe. He comes there as a stone cut out without hands.
H.C. It does say it is built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ the chief corner stone.
{48}
C.B. But that is the finish of the thing in @Ephesians 2 in connection with the kingdom; that is why the Lord is brought in. It does not say anybody builds it.
W.J.H. You are looking at it there in its finality. There is a sense in which the temple of God exists in any one locality. “Know ye not that ye are the temple of God,” is said of the assembly at Corinth. You would look for the same features in Melbourne, and I believe they are here. The Lord would encourage our hearts to see they are maintained; for it is the thought of God that every local assembly should be the temple of God.
Ques. Would that temple be apprehended by those other than the saints of God?
W.J.H. Not in its real greatness, but many would get the gain of it.
J.S.B. Do you suggest that if seen livingly in Melbourne the features would be attractive to those around?
W.J.H. I think that any heart longing for something satisfying would take account of it. Corinthians speaks of the man coming in, falling on his face, and saying, God is among you. You would like to feel that there was something like that amongst us, would you not?
{49}
J.U. Was the thought of magnificence seen in the Lord when the Jews wondered at the gracious words they heard?
W.J.H. Every feature was seen in the Lord personally. He says: “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.” This He spake of His body. It was there in Him personally. In this setting, Simeon, Zacharias, Elisabeth, Joseph and Mary, and others really formed the true temple that received the ark suitably.
H.G. What is your thought with regard to where the material came from that produced this magnificent house?
W.J.H. It was the great object of David’s life to gather material; it was what he sought in every battle. His object was to get spoil to bring in and make available for this wonderful structure. It must have been exceedingly magnificent. That indicates how we get material.
A.B.J. The magnificence of the house depended upon the occupant. Morally it is magnificent. So that, in a local assembly, if the Lord is not the centre, then the magnificence could not be seen -- as, for instance, Laodicea.
W.J.H. So that, where these features represented by the gold, the silver, and so on, are, there are conditions to which the ark can come. David had instinctive knowledge -- indeed knowledge
{50}
by the Spirit -- of what would be suitable to receive the ark. He did not regard the tent as suitable, although in grace the ark was there. He said “That is not sufficient.” The ark should have a most magnificent place, and be received there. Spiritually, you have that here, though publicly the conditions are dreadful.
R.H.V.A. Would you say that, in a peculiar and living way, we touch the blessedness of the thought of the temple in the appreciation of the affections of the saints for Christ?
W.J.H. Yes, I would. Now I believe, where the conditions are suitable, the Lord would come spiritually, as He did literally here, so that if you have the saints in any little measure corresponding with the temple, the ark will come. Then you find that Zacharias had a vision in the temple. They perceived that he had had a vision. If the temple is really here there will be incense and a vision. One would like to encourage our hearts to make room for both.
A.G.F. Do you think there should be an exercise on our part to gather up material?
W.J.H. David’s history would tell us it should be the controlling thing in our lives to have material suitable for Christ.
A.G.F. What would that be -- moral attributes
{51}
or seeking to gather it by ministry or serving others?
W.J.H. I suppose, in many ways, David gathered it. He particularly gathered it in conflict. When the question of good and evil comes up in any connection, the result of the battle will be, there is more material suitable for the temple of God.
R.H.V.A. The Psalms suggest the way in which David gathered it. The exercises he went through, and the effect upon his soul, prepared him morally for it.
W.J.H. In these exercises he learned to know God.
R.H.V.A. He wrote the @Psalm 22.
A.G.F. What an effect it would have if we thought of the result for God!
W.J.H. As far as I can see that is the basis of the conflict for David. It was the goal he had in view. You will remember he had his eye also upon what was dedicated by one and another -- what Abner dedicated, and what Saul dedicated, and what Joab dedicated. He put it all aside and kept it waiting for the day when it would have a place in this wonderful building.
T.H.G. Would you say in connection with the
{52}
receiving of the ark that those features that you referred to in @Luke 2 would set forth the gold. In regard to Anna, who speaks of redemption, would that be the silver?
W.J.H. You could not conceive that the ark could be rightly received without what the gold represents -- divine love -- so that Simeon received Him into his arms. It was an embrace. There was love there. You could not expect the ark to come in, the conscious sense of the presence of Christ, if love is not present. The Lord’s presence is known in an atmosphere of love. Everything that is different to that, the Lord would help us to judge and refuse. The gold covers everything. The cedar is all covered with the gold.
J.S.B. Would you tell us something about the incense and visions of which you spoke?
W.J.H. One has felt a little the feebleness of our meetings for prayer, that if we were more on the line of incense there would be a condition in which the Lord could give the sense of His presence, and support and prepare the way for a vision, the incense being an odour that is acceptable to God, being the expression of desires for His glory. You examine the tone of our prayers. How much incense is there?
{53}
J.H. The desire is there, @Psalm 88: 2, “Let my prayer come before thee,” would that not be incense?
W.J.H. That was David.
J.H. We take up David’s desire.
W.J.H. Well, let us take it up. The Lord would help us to take it up.
H.C. Where two or three are gathered together there am I in the midst.
W.J.H. That has the prayer meeting primarily, in view. But it is “*in My name*” -- that is the incense.
H.C. The conditions are there.
W.J.H. We want to see it is “*in My name*.” That is what marked Zacharias. He was there in the name of the Lord. The incense is prayer in relation to God’s name.
J.H. Why do you speak of the prayer meeting?
W.J.H. That is what a prayer meeting would be -- a place where incense would go up.
J.H. These are days of brokenness.
{54}
W.J.H. We do not want to lower the standard. Zacharias could have said: Will things ever be right? But he drew near and offered incense.
A.G.F. What is involved in the name? If I use a person’s name, it must be as in accordance with his mind.
W.J.H. You want it on his behalf or you would be stealing. You have no right to use my name unless you want something on my behalf. If you go to the bank and use my name, it must be as for me. Prayer is in relation to the interests of Christ and of God.
W.A.P. If the atmosphere you speak of and the conditions are right outwardly, the incense will go up.
W.J.H. I am sure the Lord would get incense.
J.S.B. You mean we get past our own needs.
W.J.H. Yes. You take Jacob’s prayer. I have felt how expressive it is (@Genesis 28: 20 -- 22). “And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me on this road ... and will give me bread to eat and a garment to put on, and I come again to my father’s house in peace -- then shall Jehovah be my God ... .”
J.S.B. Our prayers should be in relation to the interests of Christ.
{55}
W.J.H. I do not mean that we should not pray for bread or raiment. We need to pray for it more now than ever. But this prayer in the temple is on a higher level. Here is a man whose lot was to burn incense, and he did it. It was acceptable to heaven.
J.H. You are making a great deal of incense.
W.J.H. One loves to think that, while from this Egypt world there arises the stench of the blood and frogs, there should be incense in every local assembly going up to God at the present time.
J.H. There is, is there not?
W.J.H. I trust there is. One would encourage it more. Take the prayer meeting where there are 15 brothers. Are they all taking up their lot? Zacharias took up his lot and burned incense.
Ques. Would you say that @John 17 is an example of incense from the golden altar?
W.J.H. Perfectly. Every one of the Lord’s prayers were prayers of incense from the golden altar.
T.H.G. What should be the features of incense in our prayers? Could you help us in that way so that we might be encouraged on the line of offering incense?
{56}
W.J.H. The prayers of the Lord were compounded together with the fragrance of a life wholly devoted to the divine interests of God. You are affected by it. Your life is in accord with it. In the life of your soul, you are wholly devoted to the interests of God. You draw near to God. There is a smell delightful to heaven.
T.H.G. Simeon had his hands full of incense.
W.J.H. Yes. Then he says: “Now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace ... .” He delights in the greatness of that blessed Person who had come. Think of the incense going up to heaven.
T.H.G. Simeon is prepared to go out of sight now.
J.H. I suppose everyone should offer incense.
W.J.H. Surely.
J.S.B. Would you tell us about Anna as a feature that would mark closing days?
W.J.H. She touches in a peculiar way another line I had in mind -- the peculiar devotedness that marked this company. She served day and night with prayers and fasting. Her home was in the temple. She lived there.
T.H.G. Would she answer to @Psalm 27? “One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that will I seek after.”
{57}
W.J.H. Yes, to “Behold the beauty of the Lord and enquire in His temple.” She was doing all that.
R.H.V.A. Would you say Anna suggests to us the spirit in which the local assembly preserves conditions for a place suitable to the ark?
W.J.H. You nearly always find -- particularly in Luke -- that a woman is linked up with a man. If a man is brought forward, there is a woman near him -- Zacharias and Elisabeth, Joseph and Mary, Simeon and Anna. That runs through the gospel, that there is hidden away in the subjective condition what will correspond with the public position taken. Otherwise there is no power. Anna is the subjective side of Simeon.
J.S.B. She was a prophetess. Would you suggest she had visions?
W.J.H. She frequented the temple, and anyone who frequents the temple will get visions. Zacharias had had a vision, and it was perceived he had had a vision.
C.B. Paul had a vision, but he would not talk about it.
W.J.H. Yes. He kept it for 14 years. If there is no vision the people perish. If we do not get visions in Melbourne, we are going to perish.
{58}
J.H. What is a vision? Will you explain it?
W.J.H. A glimpse of what is in heaven. What Zacharias saw was a messenger from heaven who announced to him what was going on in heaven. “I am Gabriel that stand in the presence of God.” The movements of heaven were known in a vision. It brings down to the conscious knowledge of the saints what is in heaven.
G.G. Is that linked with @Luke 2?
W.J.H. Again a movement from heaven -- the heavenly hosts are there. They say: Glory to God in the highest.
R.H.V.A. Does it suggest in a practical way what is vital in my soul communion? Do I get a living impression of being there?
W.J.H. You will never forget a vision. It is not a dream. You see something. It was the secret of Paul’s spiritual life. He says he was not disobedient to the heavenly vision.
A.G.F. It is the direct communication of the mind of God to an individual -- something I have learned for myself from God.
W.J.H. You will get it generally in connection with the temple.
A.G.F. For us, dwelling in the temple would be devotion to the interests of Christ here.
W.J.H. You can understand how Zacharias
{59}
would regard the temple. It would be the subject of his life’s interest. Zacharias was an old man, but he does not shirk his service. He regards it as his great privilege to serve in God’s temple. Even when he was dumb, it says he continued until the days were finished. He does not go home until they were completed.
H.C. It says he tarried long in the temple.
W.J.H. All connecting itself with the devotedness of Zacharias to the Lord’s interests.
A.G.F. You can understand how sweet it must be to God in a scene like this to see one wholly devoted to God.
W.J.H. A feature of magnificence is that there is whole-hearted devotedness to Christ. I am sure He will give His presence to that.
T.R.Y. The true thought of the temple would preserve us in unity; preserve us from being merely local.
W.J.H. That is particularly a feature of the house of God -- universality. The temple of God is something to be maintained in the locality in the light of what is universal. All the building fitly framed together groweth to a holy temple in the Lord. When you come to Simeon, you see the feature of devotedness also, and he, too, has had communications from heaven (it does not say a vision), but it is the same principle; he knows
{60}
what is going on in heaven; the Lord’s Christ is about to appear. His life is devoted to the Lord. He speaks of himself as “thy bondman.” That is what is going to be when the Lord comes. There are going to be bondmen on earth as well as priests who offer incense.
R.H.V.A. Does that suggest to us that in the affections of the assembly the assembly waits for Christ? Is that the suggestion in the attitude of Simeon?
W.J.H. I think so. His whole life was devoted to the One he knew was coming. You can understand every morning that his outlook would be “Is this the day the Lord’s Christ will appear?” He will see Him. It says “He should not taste death till he had seen the Lord’s Christ.” What an impression that would make on each day!
G.G. The Holy Spirit was upon him; it was revealed to him by the Holy Ghost that he should not see death -- that came by the Spirit because he was a bondman.
W.J.H. I think you have the additional feature that he was one who was in touch with the temple; he came into the temple. Here is a man in touch with the temple as Zacharias and Anna; in addition he is devoted to the extent of being a bondman. I believe that is what the
{61}
Lord wants now. He wants the temple features. He wants incense, but He wants bondmen.
A.B.J. It says he came in the Spirit into the temple. What God looks for is in the Spirit.
W.J.H. Quite so. In contrast to the flesh. There are no fleshly motives.
G.G. The proof of that was the wonderful revelation he got -- the greatness of the Person taken in his arms. All God’s pleasure was in Him.
W.J.H. You would like that, if the Lord were to come today, He should be received suitably. You would like to form part of that which would receive Him.
J.U. Is that service?
W.J.H. Yes, it is. But intense service. A bondman is a man who is entirely at his master’s service. Not like an ordinary employee whose service begins at a certain time and ends at a certain time. A bondman is a man who is entirely at the disposal of his master for the whole of his life.
J.S.B. It is beautiful to see that “it is according to thy word.”
C.B. All that was seen in the Hebrew servant.
T.H.G. The apostle Paul could take it up in the true sense when he speaks of himself as the bondman of Jesus Christ.
{62}
W.J.H. Most of the apostles speak of themselves like that. As controlled by the Master, and as delighting in Him, they have accepted the place of bondmen.
W.A.P. It is the same thought as the slave, who never moves except according to his master’s word.
W.J.H. Are we prepared for that? Is the possibility of having Christ amongst us so great that we are really prepared to be bondmen?
H.G. Is the consolation of Israel that idea? Nothing would satisfy him short of that.
W.J.H. That would be the comfort of his heart, that the Lord is coming.
C.B. It says it was revealed unto him. You spoke of the vision. Paul says visions and revelations of the Lord. Does revelation follow a vision?
W.J.H. I do not know.
C.B. It was revealed to him that he should not see death until he had seen the Lord’s Christ.
A.G.F. The thought of revelation is the thought of unveiling something unseen before.
W.J.H. In that sense revelation is complete. We do not look for revelation in that sense. In Amos it says the Lord will do nothing He will not make known to His servants. He will do nothing. Here is a man that knows what the
{63}
Lord is doing, but he is a bondman, and I do not think anyone will get the secret of the Lord who is not a bondman.
A.G.F. There is no chance for volunteers?
W.J.H. No. Nor for hirelings. If we are serving for wages, the Lord, who is righteous, will give them to us; if my service is for present or even for future reward as its motive, then I will not get the secret.
J.S.B. None can bless God except in the appreciation of Christ.
W.J.H. The word “bless” is a very interesting word; it is to speak well of. As Simeon took Christ in his arms, and saw by the Spirit what was there, and Who was there, how he could speak to God. The secret of all blessing God is the apprehension of Christ. I believe we would be helped if we saw that part of this magnificence is the bondman. It would meet the lawless, democratic day we live in. God wants the magnificence in Melbourne.
W.A.P. The true bondman has no thought of reward.
W.J.H. The slave is simply and entirely at the disposal of his master.
H.C. I delight to do Thy will, O My God.
A.G.F. I love my master. That is the reason he decided to stay in the service.
{64}
W.A.P. He would not be free if he could.
W.J.H. Have we got to that? The master is so loved -- though his will is absolute -- that I would not be free if I could.
E.G.S. The company at the close of Luke answers to Simeon.
W.J.H. They continued in the temple praising and blessing God. You find them going out in Acts as His bondmen. “Lord grant to thy bondmen that with all boldness they, may speak thy word,” they say.
J.H. Ye are not your own, but bought with a price -- is that the sense of bondmen?
W.J.H. I am sure we can quote many scriptures to show that that is the thought of God. Are we prepared to enter into the position of bondmen? To surrender entirely any will of our own, and simply to be at the disposal of the Lord?
Ques. “Whatsoever things ye do ... . do all to the glory of God.” Fulfilling one’s daily routine and one’s daily duties one may still be a bondman.
W.J.H. You might be a master in the things of this life, and yet be a bondman. You might be least in the social scale of this life, yet be the Lord’s bondman.
Ques. “Take my yoke upon you ... .” Is that a bondman?
{65}
W.J.H. The yoke is something like acceptance of a bondman’s place. You are meek, and you do God’s will.
G.G. Abraham took up the bondman’s place, and he is called the friend of God.
R.H.V.A. Would it work out in its bearing in relation with each other as brethren -- particularly in our local setting?
W.J.H. It enables us to come into the house to be together in these magnificent features. You have no will, and I have no will: The sisters have no will. This position is supported by Anna. Mary says “Be it ... according to Thy word.” She is subjectively what marks Simeon publicly. She says, in effect: “I am only on earth to do the will of the Lord.” Anna is night and day in the temple. Never any time off, never any holidays, her whole life entirely devoted to the will of the Lord. If you have those conditions anywhere, you have conditions where the Lord will come in.
Rem. Peter and John would be a setting forth of that. They went together.
W.J.H. That is very good. They went up to the temple together. They are both spoken of as His bondmen. John says “His bondman, John.” Peter says “Bondman of Jesus Christ.”
Rem. The absence with Peter of silver and gold would be a testimony.
{66}
W.J.H. They had the silver and gold of God’s holy temple.
A.G.F. Well, we do not serve for wages.
W.J.H. What better wages could Simeon have than having that blessed Person in his arms? It was worth a whole lifetime of service. The Lord would come in if we were prepared to accept the bondman’s place. We shall have a sense of His presence and His glory.
C.B. What do you say is the secret of this devotedness? What brought it about in these people in Luke?
W.J.H. I have no doubt it lay in an apprehension of Christ. We find that all these people had an apprehension of Christ. David, who built the temple, or rather provided the material for the temple to be built, had an apprehension of Christ. The Psalm speaks of the initial movement. We heard of it (the ark), he says; we found it in the fields of the wood. He says, I will not sleep till I find a place for the ark. All this material came out of an appreciation of the ark.
R.H.V.A. Don’t you think in that way the bearing of things on my spirit should work out not simply that I am relieved, but that I am in the conscious enjoyment of the One who relieved me?
{67}
W.J.H. The Lord, having relieved us, would fill us with a desire to have a suitable place for Him; one that is magnificent.
R.H.V.A. Is that suggested in @Romans 12, where you are set free from the relief side, and you now present your body -- is that a bondman?
W.J.H. Yes. There is the answer in triumph on the part of the Lord. What marked the body at the beginning of Romans is removed so that, in the 12th chapter, you have the body presented holy and acceptable to God.
Ques. Starting young, I suppose, is a great thing?
W.J.H. David started when he was a lad in his father’s house; he got an impression of the magnificence of the ark, and what an unworthy place was provided for it. He says: “We found it in the fields of the wood.” Out in the open, with no suitable place to receive it. We found it in the fields. He says, I will never sleep until the ark has a suitable place. That is the spring of everything that is magnificent on our side. We want a place for Christ, and want to serve Him. We accept the bondman’s place.
Ques. There was great joy when the ark was brought up to Zion.
W.J.H. Yes. But a tent did not meet David’s desire. It was provisional. What David really had in mind was the temple.
{68}
Ques. They were able to sing when the ark was brought in, but not before.
W.J.H. Yes.
Rem. The act of the widow that cast in the two mites would be magnificent. She had a sense of true magnificence.
W.J.H. You can understand the Lord’s delight in her. She cast in all she had in devotedness to the temple.
{69}
FEATURES OF MAGNIFICENCE (2)
@Acts 1: 10 -- 26; @Acts 2: 1 -- 4
W.J.H. Some of us have been looking at the features of *magnificence* that were manifested in @Luke 1, in view of the approaching coming of the Lord, and again in @Acts 1, in view of His return to heaven, and the coming of the Holy Spirit. Along with the thought of magnificence there is also the thought of *elevation*, as exemplified in @Luke 1 by the “hill country,” and in @Acts 1 by the “upper room.” It says that Mary went “with haste” to the hill country, and found Elisabeth already there, and then it speaks of all those who dwelt in the hill country, as if there had been an exodus there. I thought that this morning we might see that where these conditions of magnificence and elevation are present, room is found for every part of the work of God. In the upper room there were Peter and John, and the other apostles, several women, Mary the mother of Jesus, and His brethren -- all representing various features of the work of God.
Ques. Do you feel that, in view of the imminent return of the Lord, these features of magnificence
{70}
should be more in evidence amongst His people?
W.J.H. Yes. It is a principle with God that the close of a dispensation should correspond with its beginning. In view of the return of the Lord, we should be exercised like David to find a suitable place for the ark. He says of the place that was to be built entirely for the housing of that cherished object that it was to be “exceeding magnifical” (@1 Chronicles 22: 5).
Ques. Were the features of magnificence seen in David himself, when God chose him from following the sheep?
W.J.H. What commended David to God was his desire that the ark should be suitably housed. He says in @Psalm 132 “We heard of it at Ephratah, we found it in the fields of the wood,” showing that in Saul’s time there was not the slightest regard for it; it was in the fields of the wood. He spent his lifetime gathering materials, the value of which, if you try to compute it, is an enormous sum -- materials for a “magnifical” abode for the ark.
Ques. Where did David get the materials from?
W.J.H. He got a great deal -- not all -- but a great deal in conflict. He fought with Moab, Edom, Syria, and returned with spoil of gold,
{71}
silver -- and brass, which he dedicated to the Lord. So every conflict amongst God’s people should yield spoil and magnificent material for the abode of the true ark.
Then in David himself there was seen a feature of magnificence -- he was *small*, so small that even Jesse, his father, overlooked him when Samuel was there. But he was ruddy and, withal, of a beautiful countenance -- the eye of the Spirit could discern in him what was suited to God.
Ques. What is the thought of elevation?
W.J.H. We must move above the level of things around us; the desire to be great, envyings, strife, evil speaking -- all these things are the reverse of magnifical -- they are contemptible in God’s sight. They do not belong to the upper room. The Lord Jesus, when questioned about His doctrine, replied, “Ask them which heard Me. I spoke openly to the world, and in secret have I said nothing.” How many of us could say that? “In secret have I said nothing.” How much we say in secret that we will not say openly. If we cannot say a thing to a brother’s face, we should not say it at all.
Ques. Is the judgment of Judas ¬ case in @Acts 1 in keeping with the thought of elevation?
{72}
W.J.H. Yes, and it is noticeable that they recognise what their own hearts were capable of; they say “he was numbered amongst us.” It was one of “us” who was guide to them that took Jesus. The description of Judas ¬ end as given here is very instructive. “He burst asunder, and all his bowels gushed out.” It was a complete exposure of the kind of man that he was, for which there is no room in the “upper room.” But there is room for every feature of the work of God.
Ques. What are those features?
W.J.H. Well, first there is Peter. He (and the others) was *staying* in the upper room -- not just visiting. We may visit it in the morning meeting or the prayer meeting for instance, but do we stay there? We should live in an atmosphere of elevation. It has been pointed out recently that Peter is always first. The feature he represents must be first. You cannot have the rest unless it is first. He represents the great feature of *subjection*. He speaks much of it in his writings. He has the keys of the kingdom. Subjection is magnificent, and is suitable material for the abode of the ark. It really goes into eternity. We must have the subjection side as seen in Peter before you can have the love side as seen in John.
Then in James and John you have the brotherly
{73}
element -- they were brothers. There is room for that feature in the “upper room.” Also for the evangelists as seen in Andrew and Philip. Andrew brought people to Jesus, and Philip is with him.
Then, in men such as Bartholomew, for example, you get those who are less prominent; but there is room for them. One has detected the tendency to discount that which is not prominent; but that is not in accordance with the “upper room.” You may search through the Gospels and the Acts for anything that Bartholomew did, and you will not find it; but he has a place amongst all the rest. The sisters cannot be prominent, but they are necessary for that which is “exceeding magnifical.”
Then there is Judas (not Iscariot). What marks him is a spirit of enquiry. He hears something which is new to him (@John 14: 22), something which does not fit in with what he had previously learnt; but instead of saying, “I cannot go with that,” he asks. The Ethiopian eunuch (@Acts 8: 31) is another fine example of this feature of magnificence. “How can I,” he says, “except some man should guide me?” We should be ready to ask about things that we do not understand, and not just reject them because they are new to us. “If anyone thinks he knows anything, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know it” (@1 Corinthians 8: 2).
{74}
Then another feature of the work of God for which there is ample room in the conditions we have been speaking about, comes to light at the close of chapter 1. That is, the acceptance of sovereignty. In choosing an apostle to replace Judas two men are found who each fulfil every requirement; that is, they have companied with the apostles all the time the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst them, beginning from the baptism of John till the day He was taken up from them. They were both men of repute, and outwardly there was no difference. The matter is then referred to the Lord, on the ground that He alone knows the hearts, and He makes known His sovereign choice. What is to be noted is that there is the most complete acceptance of it, not a word of demur; all are satisfied. Nothing is more testing than the sovereignty of God in giving one a place more than another, and nowhere else in the world is there room for it without demur, except in the “upper room.”
Ques. Does not Judas really represent apostasy, and does not the danger of that intruding amongst us make sovereignty more essential than ever? Matthias was to replace Judas.
W.J.H. It is beautiful to see how everyone acquiesces; there is no complaint. In the world it would have aroused all sorts of criticism and
{75}
bad feeling. But as “upper room” conditions are found amongst us, there is the acceptance of sovereignty and thus a place made for the ark to rest, for the ark is Christ as the expression of the entire will of God.
{76}
MOUNTAIN LESSONS
@Luke 4: 5 -- 8; @Luke 6: 12 -- 16; @Luke 9: 28 -- 36; @Luke 21: 37, 38
W.J.H. Some of us have been speaking a little together of the instinctive sense that was given to the godly remnant in the beginning of Luke that, in view of the coming in of Christ, they should be found in the hill country. Mary particularly being cognisant of the supreme greatness of the One that was coming, as coming from the Highest, being the Son of the Highest, it says “She went with haste to the hill country.” One believes that the Lord is working amongst His people throughout the world in view of having us characteristically living in an elevation above this world, in view of His own coming again. So one has felt this afternoon the Lord might help us to consider these scriptures in that light, looking at Him personally as found on each occasion on a mountain, where we shall see Him infinitely above the world around, so that we might get the right idea of elevation.
W.J.Y. By elevation, you would imply heavenly mindedness.
W.J.H. Yes, and heavenly characteristics in our lives, so that we move further away from the low level of things here.
{77}
R.H.V.A. Is that suggested to us in its perfection when John is taken to the top of the mountain and shown the heavenly city in its perfection?
W.J.H. That is very good, because you cannot see things in their true perspective on the level around us; so that on the mountain he saw what God is now producing, in its perfection and completeness.
R.H.V.A. He was only taken to the wilderness to see the display of the devil’s work.
W.J.H. Indeed that which is evil is often referred to as being seen in the plain. It was a plain in the land of Shinar where Babel was built; and it was in the plain, it says, where Sodom and Gomorrah were. The inhabitants were in keeping with that level.
W.J.Y. How do you apply the thought of the *devil* taking Him up into a high mountain?
W.J.H. I thought of looking behind what the devil did, to see that the Spirit of God brings before our eyes the perfect elevation of the Lord in His outlook here. While the Lord in grace comes down to the plain in this Gospel particularly, He descends and comes where men are, and brings with Him what they need; indeed in the tenth chapter He goes to Jericho. He descends in other scriptures -- even to the lower parts of
{78}
the earth; but so that we may -- see Him in His true glory and the elevation of His blessed character, I think these mountains are brought before us.
R.H.V.A. Is that the attitude of the Bride at the end of Revelation, when she says: “Even so come, Lord Jesus”? Is that from the mountain?
W.J.H. She is herself characteristically above the scene she is in; she is ready to receive Him. One is struck with the fact that the godly remnant in Luke felt that, if they were to be where they could rightly receive the Lord, they should go to the hill country. I think that is the exercise the Lord is giving increasingly to our hearts.
R.H.V.A. Is that instinctive rather than intelligent?
W.J.H. I think it is intelligent, but I think it is not a question of duty or command. It was the sense that they had that that One who was from above should be received as near as possible to what was above -- in an atmosphere that was above.
J.D.U. Was His descending into the plain for the purpose of breaking the bond that Held us there, so that we might be able to ascend? You speak of the plain as where the enemy’s citadel is.
{79}
W.J.H. Yes. So that in going down as the Lord did, He went to Jericho -- that downward road the man was on -- He journeyed, carrying with Him what was needed to release that man and bring him where He could take care of him, in view of His coming again.
J.D.U. So that the way is open for us as a result of what He has done to ascend; there is no reason why we should be detained at all.
W.J.H. Yes.
W.J.Y. I suppose the superiority of Christ to every temptation is the thought here.
W.J.H. Yes. What particularly comes out on this high mountain is that the Lord Jesus as *Man* has only one object. Nothing can be presented to Him -- not even all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them -- to move Him from having one object during the whole of His sojourn here. That is elevation.
Ques. You would say He had a single eye for God’s glory?
W.J.H. Yes.. The level of things around us is that the house of God has become the house of merchandise. Divine things are used to secure gain for men on every hand, and we are constantly facing in our own hearts that principle which belongs to the plain; it does not belong to the mountain. Here we see the Lord presented
{80}
with the whole glory of this scene, and it in no wise affects Him. He says, thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and *Him only* shalt thou serve. That is one feature of elevation that the Lord would encourage us to be marked for, to have *Him only* as our object in our lives here.
W.J.Y. Is that the only thing that would preserve us from the allurements that the enemy brings before us in this world?
W.J.H. It takes a great deal less than all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them to affect some of us, but the sense of the Lord in this way delighting in God would help us.
W.J.Y. It says in @Psalm 16 “I have set Jehovah always before me.”
W.J.H. “Therefore I shall not be moved.”
J.S.B. What is it detains so many Christians in the plain country?
W.J.H. I suppose it is the feeble sense we have of the greatness of Christ. Mary had a most remarkable unfolding of *who* was coming “that holy thing ... shall be called the Son of God,” “He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest” -- and all that affected her movements. So with Simeon. Think of the light he had in his heart as to the greatness of the One who was coming in!
{81}
R.M.Y. In this mountain, would you say, the Lord has a sense of the greatness of God; but it brings before us the greatness of Christ as well?
W.J.H. One delights to think of the blessed One treading this scene absolutely controlled by God, as His object alone. That is what God desired from the outset in relation to His people. Thou shalt serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, with all thy mind. God wanted it *all*. Here was one blessed Man in whom He had it *all*.
R.H.V.A. That morally represents elevation in Man.
W.J.H. I feel we see true elevation here in One who was not interested in anything else but the service of God.
R.H.V.A. Is that why the apostle says “For me to live is Christ”?
W.J.H. That would be in accord with it -- whether we live or die, whether present or absent, to be acceptable. That was his object.
W.J.Y. In looking at Luke’s Gospel as the coming into view of the vessel of grace, this particular passage would show His competency to deal with every condition?
{82}
W.J.H. It says when the devil had finished every temptation -- every principle of evil in the universe.
Rem. He said, I am not alone, because the Father is with Me; He had a distinct sense of the support of the Father in the pathway He was treading.
W.J.H. Here He has one object. That is the first feature we see here -- One who has *one* object. That is the great fundamental feature of true elevation according to God.
J.D.U. There is no lowering of the standard, as is said, to meet the times.
W.J.H. Quite. I am sure you will agree how constantly we have to judge ourselves as to the permission in our motives and hearts of another object. Some of us were saying this morning, Jonathan said to David, “Thou shalt be first and I shall be next,” disclosing that there was an object other than David in his heart.
J.S.B. Are the attractions of the hill country open to the youngest?
W.J.H. I suppose in Mary you would find something more youthful than in Simeon. You have various conditions presented. It speaks of all those that dwelt there; there were not only
{83}
Simeon and Anna, Joseph and Mary, Zacharias and Elisabeth. It says “all” that dwelt there; evidently there were many there. It is open to the young as well as the old to move in their souls to that which is above this scene. The Lord would help them and keep them there.
R.H.V.A. Would this be what the apostle meant in @2 Corinthians 11: 2: “I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ”? That she should not be corrupted -- is that what he means?
W.J.H. Yes. So that every other object of our hearts would be rejected in the light of the espousal to the one person.
C.H.W. Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God and Him only shalt thou serve. Would worship be God-ward and service man-ward?
W.J.H. You get the same thought: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart ... and thy neighbour as thyself. The latter is man-ward, but it springs from what goes upward.
Then, as to the scripture in sixth chapter, it says the Lord went up into the mountain to pray. “It came to pass ... He went out into a mountain to pray ... continued all night in prayer to God.” I believe our prayers want elevating. One feels it for oneself, that the Lord would elevate the
{84}
character of our prayers. I suppose all prayer from the saints should take character from the prayers of Christ. He goes to a mountain to pray.
W.J.Y. I was much struck with what Mr. Ware said when he was here -- that we wanted to have more golden altar prayer. That is elevation.
W.J.H. We were referring to Jacob’s prayer as being a fair sample of many of our prayers. @Genesis 28: 20 -- 22: “And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me on this road that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and a garment to put on, and I come again to my father’s house in peace, then shall Jehovah be my God” -- is a pretty good summary of the majority of our prayers. One does not find fault with that prayer itself, but that is not the prayer you hear on the mountain. If a brother is spiritual, his prayers will be elevated.
R.M.Y. What is the weakness of that prayer?
W.J.H. His outlook was not high enough. Jacob was the centre of his outlook. Now, take the prayer the Lord taught His disciples “Father, Thy name be hallowed” -- that is the first utterance -- “Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth as is done in heaven.” Do you think we pray that way very often?
{85}
R.M.Y. The Father is the centre; the object there. You would say it is a prayer from the mountain.
W.A.P. Does the mountain suggest solitude?
W.J.H. No, not exactly. It suggests more elevation -- above the general character of things around. He was alone there, too, but that is not particularly the point. God in His faithfulness and care desires us to commit our earthly matters to Him, but He wants to hear us pray on the mountain, with Himself and His glory before us.
J.D.U. That refers to our private prayer as well as to prayer in public.
W.J.H. There will not be much elevation in public prayer if there is not any in private prayer.
Ques. The nearer we get to heaven, the deeper the sense of the Person we address. I suppose that would affect worship and prayer.
W.J.H. So that it says in @John 17, where we have another prayer from a wonderful altitude: “Father, the hour is come. Glorify Thy Son that Thy Son also may glorify Thee.” The whole desire of that prayer is not based upon the glorification of Christ, but on the glory of the Father.
{86}
H.C. He said, what shall I say -- save Me from this hour? He chose rather that the Father’s name might be glorified.
W.J.H. When He was going to select His disciples here, going to make a fresh move, it says He continued all night in prayer. One would feel there is a word to us that, if there is a fresh movement either individually or together in any way, the Lord would help us to pray from the elevation of the mountain in relation to that matter.
Ques. Is that earnestness?
W.J.H. Yes, and intense dependence.
H.C. You would say Paul’s prayers were prayers from the mountain.
W.J.H. Surely. How little he brings in himself in them.
Ques. Would you say prayers for the blessing of the saints are golden altar prayers?
W.J.H. It depends what you really want, that is, as to how far it is the glory of God and of Christ that is before your soul. A brother who preaches might pray for blessing, but he might be allowing something for himself in it. That is on the level of man.
Rem. You can only pray according to your desires. It seems our desires want elevating.
{87}
W.J.H. They would be more elevated if we were on the first mountain referred to -- with one object before us. Our prayers would be elevated if that were so.
Ques. Is there incense in connection with prayer?
W.J.H. The prayers at the golden altar are incense. In @Revelation 5: 8, it says: “The elders ... having every one of them harps and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of the saints.” Prayers from that altar go up fragrant to God from this scene, and it is a wonderful privilege to present something to God that is fragrant today, with all the corruption around -- that there should be a fragrance going up to Him!
W.J.Y. Mr. Ware told us he knew of a case where the parents prayed for the conversion of their son for many years, and their prayer was not answered. Then they got some help on the lines we are speaking of this afternoon, and they prayed for his conversion for the glory of God; and their prayer was answered.
W.J.H. You see that with Hannah. How often she had expressed her desire for a son. But when she prays in the temple and makes clear in her prayer that she wants that son for God. Eli says, Thy prayer is heard.
{88}
Ques. I suppose with a great deal of prayer the motive is wrong?
W.J.H. It was right with Zacharias; it was at the time of incense that he prayed. The light of the coming in of Christ came in connection with the incense. It was at the hour of incense. I am sure it will be in the hour of incense that we shall get the light of the return of Christ. When incense is going up to heaven, we shall know of the coming of Christ. I believe that it is clear from Scripture that the Lord will do nothing without revealing His secret to His servants, the prophets. Everything He does He will make known. I am confident the Lord will give to His people the definite sense of the imminent coming of Christ. It will be connected with incense as at the beginning.
H.C. It is important in connection with the incense to consider the imminence of His return.
W.J.H. Those who offer incense will know it. Gabriel appears to Zacharias with the announcement of the coming of Christ.
H.C. It would be a great incentive to offer incense.
W.J.H. Hence the importance of moving away from ourselves.
{89}
R.M.Y. You feel there will be some preliminary notice in that way?
W.J.H. It is in keeping with what has gone before. God has made known in a spiritual way what He is going to do. It was divinely communicated to Simeon. It was not through the study of Daniel that he knew he should not taste death until he had seen the Lord’s Christ.
A.G.F. We all have the doctrine of it, but that is not what you refer to, is it?
W.J.H. Everybody in Israel had the doctrine of it, but Simeon had had a divine communication. It is evident that Zacharias and Elisabeth, Simeon and Anna, Joseph and Mary, at least knew, not only in a general way, that the Messiah was coming. All Israel could have the light of that. But they knew something much more definite than that. I believe that is what the Lord will give in connection with the offering up of incense.
G.H.McK. Would you explain what you mean by offering up incense?
W.J.H. The incense represents the desires in the heart for the glory of God and the interests of Christ. Those odours in the vials in @Revelation 5 are not prayers like Jacob’s, “If thou wilt give me bread to eat ... .” Those odours are prayers
{90}
from the earth for the rights of God to be maintained here.
Ques. Those prayers rise to heaven?
W.J.H. They, spring from the sense of the greatness of Christ and the desire for His glory.
J.E. In the light of incense, are we not tested as to long prayers?
W.J.H. Have we got sufficient incense for them? Take a brother who prays for twenty minutes; has he that much incense? If so, we shall be delighted; heaven will be delighted. It is exceedingly precious, and it is very rare. Are the breathings that are being expressed the longings of heart in relation to the glory of God? Have I these longings in relation to Him? I do not think I could pray for twenty minutes on that line.
R.M.Y. Should prayers in public be on any other line? I refer to our prayer meetings.
W.J.H. I believe the normal character of the meeting for prayer would be at the golden altar; even if you are praying for one who is sick, laid aside, it would not be connected merely with earthly circumstances, but with the interests of the Lord in raising up or supporting that one.
J.D.U. Is it significant that the Lord in His deep desires for the will of God to be done in
{91}
connection with the choice of the twelve would deliberately choose the one who was a betrayer.?
W.J.H. I think so; it was subsequent to being all night in prayer. Nevertheless, the Lord chooses Judas, knowing him. There is no accident, but it was to expose once and for all what our own hearts are capable of.
W.J.Y. It is very appealing. Great as the Lord was, He did not make this selection without preface -- prayer to God.
W.J.H. It is profound instruction for us.
J.S.B. Do you think that the pressure worldwide, the increased suffering amongst so many of the saints, will bring an elevation in prayer?
W.J.H. One has felt the Lord is using the difficulties of the present time to help us to reach the hill country. I am sure we will admit how much we have borne features in keeping with the world around us. The Lord is helping us to judge this. He is moving us above the level of things around. The present conditions are His servant to help us.
W. Going back, I would like to say I think that praying in the Spirit is heard immediately, but, after all, the answer may be delayed. It was delayed in the case of Daniel. The powers of evil have so much influence, that they are permitted to hinder an immediate answer, although
{92}
it is for our good that the answer is delayed, although the delay comes from the enemy.
W.J.H. That is very instructive. While Daniel did not get his answer at once, what did exist was that he was a man *greatly* beloved in heaven. He was recognised as greatly beloved.
The Lord chose the disciples on the mount, and came down with them to the plain. He wanted to convey to them the sense that their calling was an elevated one. They were called by Him and chosen by Him. They were above the scene through which they were passing.
R.M.Y. What is the third mountain?
W.J.H. I thought that the peculiar connection with the expression “about eight days” indicated to us that on this mountain there is given to us a vision, a picture of that which will pass out of time into eternity, so that we may get before our souls the wondrous elevation of what is eternal.
R.M.Y. You view the eighth day as being linked with eternity?
W.J.H. I think it is helpful to see that the eternal conditions are reached in two ways, one on the line of John as connected with the first day, and being therefore wholly new. There is no link whatever with anything that ever transpired; but in connection with Luke, the line of recovery, and the undoing of what sin and
{93}
Satan have done. God reaches the same day on the line of carrying over what is worthy of a place in eternity. I believe you get one of the fullest unfoldings in Scripture of what will fill eternity in this chapter.
W.J.Y. Do you mean in the converse with Moses and Elias?
W.J.H. Partly; more or less in the whole setting of what is brought forward.
W.J.Y. Would you go with this? I thought that, in this Gospel particularly, the Lord Jesus, as the Son of Man, was given this taste of glory as a Man in order to strengthen Him and fit Him for the pathway He was taking to the Cross.
W.J.H. That would be right. We would have to observe He took Peter, James and John with Him; so there is something for us to see.
W.J.Y. Do you not think in principle that what was true of Him, the perfect Man, must be true of us? It is only a taste and the knowledge of glory and of God’s purpose that will fit us for coming to the plain, and meeting the power of the enemy.
W.J.H. Yes. So Peter, James, and John, after this visit to the mountain, would be prepared for everything, being superior to all in their
{94}
own souls through the gain of what they saw on this mountain.
Ques. Did the Lord have a special purpose in taking these three disciples with Him?
W.J.H. These three needed it most on the line pointed out. They had to face things more severely than the others. They had to face special circumstances, special suffering.
W.J.Y. Would you develop a little the thought you had in regard to eternity?
W.J.H. The small way we can take in eternity must disclose to us that whatever is eternal must be unspeakably great. There is nothing that we touch that is earthly that is great enough to occupy anybody for ever. On this mountain you have the unfolding of what is great enough in itself to be a theme and object for ever.
Rem. Peter speaks of holiness in connection with this mountain. It says, without holiness none shall see the Lord.
W.J.H. That will be one feature that will pass on for ever -- holiness.
Ques. Matthew says after six days?
W.J.H. Yes, after six days, meaning that the particular features of Matthew and Mark will be enjoyed on the seventh day in the world to
{95}
come. Luke gives you that which will be carried over from the seventh day to the eighth day. There is no ninth day in the future. The eighth day is the day of eternity that Peter speaks of.
R.M.Y. What are these features?
W.J.H. The first one of them is marvellous -- that the Lord Jesus Christ will be Man, in the place of dependence for eternity -- on the eighth day. He was seen on this mount on the eighth day praying. He is still Man, therefore still accepts the place of dependence and subjection.
R.H.V.A. Is that seen in @1 Corinthians 15 -- being subject?’
W.J.H. Yes. The Son is placed in subjection. I do not think our hearts fully take in the great wonder of the fact that the Lord Jesus is Man, and remains a Man throughout eternity.
J.S.B. What did Peter have in mind when he says we “were eye-witnesses of His majesty”?
W.J.H. He was speaking there particularly in regard to His face, which shone as the sun. The seventh day will be ruled by Christ as the sun rules the day now. Luke does not say that. The fashion of His countenance was different. Sorrow and suffering and reproach have passed away for ever on the eighth day, and His countenance
{96}
is different. His countenance is there for us to see on the eighth day.
J.D.U. The effect will be -- worship filling the heart?
W.J.H. Yes. I do not think we will weary of seeing that countenance in the eighth day. It is blessed enough to be looked at throughout the eighth day.
Rem. I think it is a good thing for us that He is a Man through all eternity, because when we see Him on the mount of transfiguration, we read that Moses and Elias were quite familiar with Him. They talked with Him, and not He with them.
W.J.H. That is beautiful, as indicating something else that goes on on the eighth day; the mutual intercourse between the heavenly saints and Christ. It says Moses and Elias *talked* with Him -- it is a wonderful word. It is quite different from an official statement. Like we saw yesterday, Elijah, having crossed the Jordan, Elisha with him, it says they went on and talked. They were so together and in such liberty together; such happiness and freedom existed that Elijah and Elisha went on talking. So here it says they appeared in glory. They talked with Jesus. I do not think we shall ever weary of that.
{97}
J.D.U. Do you imply then that that wonderful privilege is open for us now as coming into the elevated position?
W.J.H. That is one great feature of elevation -- communion with Christ.
G.H.McK. What is the force of appearing in glory?
W.J.H. I do not know, except to emphasise that this scene belongs to glory, not to the earth at all.
G.H.McK. The raiment was white.
W.J.H. His raiment was white and glistering. The raiment of the Lord as seen in the eighth day refers to the manifestation of the beauty and purity of every one of his actions. That is what makes that raiment. The apostle John knew that raiment was far greater than anything this world could hold. He says in @John 21: 25: “Many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written.” Those actions, one by one, make up this raiment. Eternity will be the unfolding of their purity and beauty to the adoring hearts of the saints.
T.R.Y. Could we say any one position occupied by the Lord Jesus Christ is greater than another?
{98}
W.J.H. I do not know whether we ought to compare them like that. What impresses us is that these are themes sufficiently glorious to last for ever. The countenance of Christ is placed first, then the raiment.
W.J.Y. You would correct any thought in our minds that these things only belong to the millennial period?
W.J.H. Luke wants to show that the theme is so great, it is more than for the seventh day; it is the eighth day.
J.E. Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and *Him only*. The Lord is great enough personally to sustain that worship.
R.H.V.A. Does @Revelation 21 bring this out: “Behold I make all things new.” The greatness of Christ would be sufficient to occupy us eternally. Is it in that sense ever fresh?
W.J.H. It is ever fresh. Gazing on His countenance, and the contemplation of His raiment, would be always fresh. Think of talking with Him! Who would weary of talking with Him?
Ques. Is there anything of that to be entered into today by us? Is there a sight of that glory?
W.J.H. I think it was this that supported John when he was left alone in the Isle of Patmos
{99}
for the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus Christ. It was this in the heart of James that enabled him to go to the scaffold. This held Peter so that he could face with equanimity his decease.
W.J.Y. Do you think a sight of the glory must precede suffering for us? We must have some taste of the glory if we are to face suffering for Christ.
W.J.H. We have no reserves if we have not seen the glory.
R.M.Y. Is there a suggestion here that the death of Christ is an eternal theme?
W.J.H. While they talked with Him, they spake of His decease which He should accomplish at Jerusalem. That is not His betrayal and murder exactly.
R.M.Y. J.N.D. speaks of it as departure.
W.J.H. His wonderful exit from this scene.
Ques. Why was it Moses and Elias?
W.J.H. They belonged to heaven. Elias was taken to heaven. It says, the Lord would take him to heaven; they were heavenly ones.
H.C. Have you any thought as to the cloud?
{100}
W.J.H. It says there appeared a cloud on the eighth day. The cloud is connected with the presence of God. It symbolizes that God is there. That is a great feature of eternity. God is there. The tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell with them. How is He with them? Even in the eighth day He is with them in that which in its nature indicates there is something unseen. It tells us that while there is what is seen, there is also what cannot be seen.
Ques. Is that the same thought as the cloud received Him out of their sight in Acts?
W.J.H. Yes. In Revelation the Lord is seen clothed with a cloud. Though there is much known and delighted in, there is what cannot be seen or known -- He is clothed with a cloud.
J.S.B. What is it to be heavy with sleep?
W.J.H. It brings in the sign of our weakness. The Lord would awaken us to see His glory. This is the time to awaken -- just before the Lord comes is the time to wake and see it.
W.J.Y. Is there any other Scripture that speaks so definitely of eternity?
W.J.H. There are other passages that give a good deal of instruction about the eighth day -- perhaps more than we think -- as the light of what will go on in eternity.
{101}
W.J.Y. I am sure we all need to remember that that which is displayed in the 1000 years in the world to come is not the end of things, and that scripture has given instruction for us as to what is eternal.
W.J.H. The last feature brought forward is the voice out of the cloud, and the voice Peter speaks of as “such a voice” -- never was there a voice like it! The voice disclosed to their hearts the unique and supreme place the Son of God has in the affections of the Father. “This is My beloved Son ... hear Him.” I think we shall hear that voice. There will be in eternity the continuance to us of the unique and special place Christ has in the affections of the Father. The divine answer is in the thirty-fifth verse -- out of the immediate presence of God. That voice left an impression on Peter’s heart which was never removed. It says “Hear Him.” Who will tell what the Lord will speak about in eternity? You can understand the whole of the new heavens and the new earth will be silent to listen to Christ whenever He speaks.
Rem. That is our attitude as we seek to hear Him. All other voices have to cease.
W.J.H. Quite.
W.J.Y. At the end of the millennium the Lord delivers up the kingdom, but this is to continue.
{102}
W.J.H. The Spirit of God connects it with the eighth day, deliberately.
J.D.U. When everything that is foreign to the presence and the holiness of God is put away, we can understand what He will tell us of -- He will speak of the greatness of the heart of God.
Rem. There is no mention that the cloud disappears.
W.J.H. The cloud will always be there -- even in the eighth day. God dwells there in such a way as will give us the sense that there is something unseen and unseeable.
W.J.Y. There is that which is unrevealable -- even then.
W.J.H. . The cloud is the symbol of that.
G.H.McK. What about the last passage we read?
W.J.H. One had in mind that the Lord, having taught them during the day, retires at night to the Mount of Olives, to the spiritual sphere, to what is heavenly. I think there is a good deal of instruction for us in that -- particularly for those who seek to serve in any way -- that having finished our service we retire to the Mount of Olives. That would keep things properly adjusted.
{103}
R.M.Y. It may be there is a tendency for servants who have worked hard to retire to what is natural, and find rest there.
W.J.H. We all suffer from that. Having finished the day, we take rest in natural things. He went to the Mount of Olives -- as was His custom -- to the spiritual elevation where He was in touch with heaven.
