{#LOVERS OF CHRIST}
{1}
LOVERS OF CHRIST
@1 Samuel 13: 13 - 14; @1 Samuel 16: 18 - 21; @1 Samuel 18: 1 - 4, 16, 20; @1 Kings 5: 1 - 6
I desire to bring these scriptures before our hearts, that we may accept their challenge as to the character of our love for Christ. I trust everyone present loves Christ in some measure and in some way; love Him because they have found attractiveness in Him. The ultimate position of those who do not love Christ is serious beyond telling. The Apostle Paul in the close of the first epistle to the Corinthians makes clear what is going to happen to those who do not love Christ. He says, “If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha,” that is “accursed at the coming of the Lord.” Not *now*, thank God, for until the Lord comes there is still room given for us to love Christ, to change our minds, as Paul himself did. There was a time when he did not love Christ, but I think we would all agree that he became one or the greatest lovers of Christ that has ever been on earth, loving Him because of attractiveness in Him. When great period is over, any who do not love Christ are coming under the curse of God.
I desired to say a few words as to these various persons who are said to have loved David so that we might be searched as to what is the character of our love, how far it will go. David’s name means “beloved”, reminding us uniquely of the Lord Jesus, who is called in Scripture “the beloved”. That word in @Ephesians 1: 6 does not indicate exactly who loves Him, but He is “the beloved”. There are those who can say, “my beloved”. God Himself leading in that way, “behold my servant ... my beloved”, @Matthew 12: 18. And so in the first scripture read, it says, “The Lord hath sought him a man after
{2}
his own heart.” Even before David is formally named, Samuel, in announcing the displacement of Saul, says, “the Lord hath sought him a man after his own heart.” I take it that “a man after his own heart” is a man who draws forth the love of God, calls out that love because of attractiveness. There is a character of love that is in the nature of philanthropy. One of the characters of God’s love to man is in the nature of philanthropy, but that in no way applies to Christ. Christ was the object of love as inherently attractive, “The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand,” @John 3: 35. That is because of attractiveness on His side. I would desire that we ponder that; for in the blessed Person of Jesus there is an object for the heart of God. In one of the gospels the word from heaven is, “Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight.” In another, “This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight.” In the last case God is calling our attention to the object of His heart. I believe that if we went through Scripture and gathered up every reference to what delights God, we would see that every single feature is expressed perfectly in Christ. In the blessed Person of Jesus is God’s paradise. Scripture speaks of “the paradise of God”; His Eden, and everything that contributes to God’s paradise is resident in Jesus. Everything that pleases God, everything that delights God -- a stronger word -- everything that God loves, is there in Jesus. Samuel says, “The Lord hath sought him a man” and He found him: “I have found David,” and of the blessed Lord, “in thee I have found my delight.” How blessed to allow our hearts to be engaged with the One who engages the heart of God. I do not think we can conceive anything greater than One who in Manhood engages the heart of God so that God loves Him. “The Father loves the Son and has given all things to be in His hand.” Hence, if God finds attractiveness in Jesus sufficient to perfectly satisfy His heart, how right it is that we should love Him.
What follows the statement that God had sought a
{3}
man after His own heart, is a frequent reference to those who love David. From that point he gradually became the object of all the people in some measure, and it is of this I wanted to speak. There is, first, the unnamed person who speaks of David to Saul. It is not formally said that he loved David, but he says, “I have seen a son of Jesse.” No one could know David without loving him; no one could know Jesus without loving Him. This knowledge is not casual knowledge but conscious knowledge. He then goes on to speak of David. “He is cunning in playing,” so able to play on his harp that he stirs the very soul of the people, such a musician is he. Then he is a “mighty valiant man”, he is a man of courage. Probably this man knew of the lion and the bear and how David went out after them. He is “a man of war”: he is a man who knows how to conduct war according to God: very few know that. David knew the character of weapons God would employ, weapons that are not carnal. He is “prudent in matters” or “skilled in speech”. How it could be said of the Lord, “Never man spake like this man.” Did anyone ever know how to use words like Jesus? What perfection in speaking marks Him! David is a comely person, or a man of good presence. You could not be in the presence of Christ without realising that you were in the presence of One who is truly great. “He shall be great.” This dear man certainly loved David. “I have seen him;” he says, and through his words David is sent for and brought to Saul, and it says, “David came to Saul, and stood before him: and he loved him greatly.” That is remarkable! It is there for our instruction and our warning. As the beloved of God stands in the presence of Saul, for the moment Saul’s heart is engaged. It says, “He loved him greatly.” I believe there are moments in all our histories when that was true of us, when Christ stood out great to our hearts for the moment. But this was not continued with Saul. Indeed, we are told that he became his enemy continually, and his would-be murderer. What has happened? At the
{4}
outset he loves David greatly, and in the end he is his enemy and would murder him. Why? As Saul learns to know David he realises that David is to displace him, and Saul is not prepared for that. I believe one of the great exercises we are facing in this city is this matter of displacement, and the refusal to accept it converts lovers of Christ to enemies of Christ. The one we once loved greatly we may persecute, because we will not accept displacement. Once our eyes are fixed on Christ we must face this matter of the displacement of ourselves. A good part of the conflict lies there. Saul envies David. He eyes him and he envies him, and if envy is operating in our souls God only knows what we will do. I do not think there is any limit at which envy will stop. Indeed, the root of the murder of Christ was envy. I would speak to my own heart, for I have had to face this matter; we all have to. If our love for Christ is not to wane, but wax, we must face the matter of the displacement of what we are. This exercise exists in every subdivision in some form. When we realise that the Lord is with someone perhaps more distinctively than He is with us, beware lest envy arise, for who knows where it may lead us unless judged?
The next who loves David is Jonathan. A much better Christian, as we would say, than Saul. What a beginning he had. The beauty of David, the attractiveness of David, came home to Jonathan’s heart, for it says of David, “he was ruddy”, that is to say the freshness of life was there, and he was “of a beautiful countenance.” You could not look on the face of David and not be attracted. The attractiveness of David as he faces Goliath, and is prepared to jeopardise his life, moves Jonathan’s heart and it is knit with David. There was a bond formed between Jonathan and David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul. I think that is stated many times in Scripture, “he loved him as his own soul.” But if we do not go beyond that we are in very great danger. I would speak humbly in this matter, but we need to love Christ
{5}
more than our own soul. The impression the words leave is that Jonathan loved David to the same extent as he loved himself. That character of love will not hold us to Christ. There comes a time when David is rejected and Jonathan is to face whether he will leave his father, whether he will leave his city, whether he will leave his house, for David. The Lord allows matters to arise that test us to our very foundation as to the character of our love. Jonathan’s love for David was precious, “passing the love of women” indeed, yet it was not sufficient to cause him, for David’s sake, to break with his father, to break with his own city, and to break with his own house. When it is a matter of what is due to the Lord, our love is tested by what is natural far more than we have any conception, and how often it comes out that in fact we prefer our natural relationships than what is due to Christ. Do not let us deceive our hearts. Very few of us are better than Jonathan, and Jonathan prefers to remain where Saul is. “In their death they were not divided.” They should have been divided. They should have been divided in their life, but in their life they were not divided, and in their death they were not divided. Lover of David as Jonathan was, he was not prepared to break with Saul. And that brought him into the hands of the Philistines who slew him. If we do not face this test, then natural, human thoughts will get control of us and destroy us. If what is due to the Lord does not take precedence over our own father, over our own city, over our own house, then sooner or later we are bound to fall under the power of the Philistines and lose our real understanding of the things of God.
Then it says, “all Israel and Judah loved David.” You might think that this is an excellent situation. That is to say that all true Christians on the face of the earth love Christ surely. But nevertheless, that love is to be tested. You might say David’s position is assured for all Israel and Judah love him. But when David is in reproach and rejection, what mean these 4,000 warriors under Saul
{6}
that seek to capture David and kill him. Why should a city of Judah, having received such devoted service from David, be ready to give him up to Saul? He had delivered then from the Philistines! David says, “Will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men into the hand of Saul?” and God says, “They will.” Sooner or later the test comes to every heart, what place has David really?
Then it says Michal loved David. She was given to him as wife and she loved him. That is a happy situation. In the secret of his affection, knowing his attractiveness as no one else should know it, but this love is tested. She stands first fairly well. When Saul would take David from his house and kill him, Michal protects him and finds a way out for him so that we would honour that amount of love in her heart for David, but later she is given to another. There is no reference to any resentment or conflict on her side in this sad matter. She is tested still more when David is on the throne and his enemies subdued. What will David do? David devotes himself and all that he has to God. He lays aside his external greatness and dons a linen garment and dances before God in holy joy. Michal, looking out of the window, despised him in her heart. We are tested as to whether we love Christ sufficiently to be with Him in His complete devotedness to the will and service of God so that nothing is held back from that great end. David ever had it as his object that God should have a house and be ministered to. The return of the ark sets this great matter in movement and David dances with all his might. Michal’s love is tested by this: she is not with David, she despises him in her heart and she has no children to the day of her death.
I come now to the one that I trust we all will accept as a model. It says, “Hiram was ever a lover of David,” or “always loved David.” The inference is that from the time David appeared publicly, Hiram had his eye and his heart on him, and there was never a moment that he ceased to love him. Very much like Abigail, who stands out in blessed contrast to Michal, though Abigail for the moment
{7}
was bound to Nabal. But she says of him, “Nabal is his name, and folly is with him.” Of David she says, “my lord fighteth the battles of the Lord, and evil hath not been found in thee all thy days.” The inference is that every day of David was observed by Abigail. How we love to go over every day of Jesus as He was here fighting the battles of the Lord. She says iniquity was not found in him one of those days, showing that she was a lover of David before she was formally his wife. Hiram is such a person. The Spirit of God says he “always loved David.” He would take account of David going out from his father to meet the champion of the Philistines, the middle man of the devil. That word “champion” means middle man, the devil has his middle man to bring man under his control, but God’s middle man, God’s mediator, comes out and faces this champion -- Hiram loved him then. Who would not? When David is in rejection through Saul, the implication is that Hiram still loved him, for he always loved him. When David comes to the throne, and proceeds to put his enemies under his feet. Hiram still loves him. When the apostate Absalom arises, and displaces David from the hearts of Israel, he did not steal Hiram’s heart, for Hiram “always loved David.” When David returns to his place in Israel and begins to prepare for the great service of God, making instruments for His praise, also made such preparations for the building of the temple. Hiram still loved David. The last days call for those who love Christ. Hiram is the man that can provide material for a dwelling for David personally. Before he provides material for the house of God, he provided for David’s house. In truth, Christ cannot dwell except where He is loved. It is only those who always love Him that furnish Him with a dwelling, and it is to such persons that Solomon turns to provide material for the house of God. In @2 Chronicles 2: 8 Solomon says, “Send me also cedar trees, fir trees and algum or sandal-wood trees.” This man, who “always loved David”, could provide these materials for the house of God: no one else could.
{8}
Cedar-wood is kingly greatness, suitable for the presence of God: no one is morally great unless they love Christ, and love Him always. Such a man can provide cedar. The next is fir, that is perennial freshness. “I am like a green fir tree,” @Hosea 14: 8. Nobody is like a green fir tree unless they love Christ always. Hiram could provide sandalwood, the fragrant wood that provides an odour in the house. Meet a brother or sister who loves Christ in all conditions, what an odour he or she brings in. Christ is not here, you might say, but His assembly is here and in truth the place His assembly has in our hearts is the place He has. “Why persecutest thou me?” All that Saul was doing to the assembly he was doing to Christ. What the Lord is seeking for, I am sure, is persons who love the assembly because it is Christ. You could not say that a person loved a man who hated his wife. We are tested as to the character of our love for Christ by our attitude towards the saints, the assembly of God.
One trusts these scriptures will speak to us as to our love for Christ. How wide the range of persons who are said to have loved David and yet how few loved him as Hiram did. Saul did not always love David. Jonathan did not always love David. Jonathan went out to meet David and they wept together, but it says, “Jonathan went into the city,” David did not, “he departed,” there were those who were with David, who remained with him. You could not say that all Israel and Judah “always loved David,” for some of them took part in his persecution. You certainly cannot say Michal “always loved David”, for she at one point despised him in her heart. “Hiram always loved David”; he discovered something of the inherent attractiveness of David. He represents the character of person that provides substance for the assembly, the kind of person that brings the true cedarwood, brings the true fir trees, brings the true sandalwood to build up the assembly for Christ and for God. The greatest lover of Christ was Paul. He says, “I rejoice in sufferings for you, and I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of
{9}
Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly”, @Colossians 1: 24. What he suffered for the assembly, who can tell? But it was because he always loved Christ. I commend Hiram to us as the model for every heart so that always, whether in rejection, whether in conflict, whether in glory, whether as trodden under foot in apostasy as in Christendom now, let us always love Christ, and Therefore always love His assembly.
{10}
“BY WHICH ALSO YE ARE SAVED”
@1 Corinthians 15: 2; @Ephesians 2: 8, 9; @1 Peter 3: 18 - 22;
@1 Corinthians 3: 11 - 15; @Psalm 80: 19
The object in reading these four scriptures is to bring before our hearts some of the vast range of things that God uses for our salvation. The apostle states that “God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ.” What is in mind for His beloved people is that they should be saved. I think I could say truly that I have never felt more, both for myself and my brethren, the urgent need of salvation. If it was not that God is our Saviour God the present situation would be overwhelming, whether we think of it in relation to the nations -- the dreadful flood of hatred and war that is sweeping through this world, engulfing mankind and our need to be saved from being swept into its current -- or whether we think of the steadily lowering moral standards that are accompanying the war almost everywhere, which also threaten to engulf the people of God, or whether we think of the approaching tide of deception that would deceive all if possible. We are drawing near to the appearing of one whose coming is with all “signs and lying wonders and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness.” Every character of deception will then be active. Then we are facing the dreadful apostasy against Christ, amounting to treading under foot the Son of God. How solemn a description by the Holy Spirit of the turning away from Christ that is taking place today. It is equivalent to treading Christ under the feet. Then there is the manifest evidence of Satanic power that would destroy what God has recovered in our day. I believe Satan is using his last effort to overwhelm, to corrupt, to destroy, what has been recovered to the truth of the assembly and Christ’s place in it.
{11}
With these thoughts in one’s mind and heart, what God uses for our salvation came before me. First of all *salvation depends on God*. He is the Saviour God. There could be no salvation for His people if He were not God our Saviour. I commend to every heart the breaking up of the glories of God so that we may look at them. When we think of God as God, we think of One who is supreme, who is absolute, who is far beyond the conception of the creature, but God is pleased to make known rays of His glory so that we may know Him and delight in Him. One of these glories is that He is a Saviour God. He is also “the blessed God,” He is “the eternal God,” He is “the Almighty God,” He is “the most high God,” all these are rays of His glory for us to worship Him in the light of. The apostle says to Timothy, “God our Saviour,” meaning that all salvation has its origin, and begins, with God. Salvation comes to us through Christ our Saviour. Is there a heart that does not move at the thought of the Saviour, our Saviour? In one of Mr. Darby’s writings, we find that as he ponders the deep things of God he breaks out “good and precious Saviour.” What a name! But I wanted to say a few words tonight as to *what* God uses for our salvation. Not that I can cover all, for He uses a vast range of things. *Grace* is one element that saves. Then I would say a word as to *faith* saving, I would also like to point out that *baptism* saves, water saves, which refers to baptism. Then I would point out that there is the thought of being saved through *fire*, and finally and greatest of all, we are saved as we are restored and the *face of Christ shines upon us*. It says in @Psalm 80, “Turn us again, O God, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.” The greatest possible enjoyment of salvation is in the shining of the face of Christ.
I want to concentrate on these five headings. The first is grace. We are saved by grace. In the light of the overwhelming character of evil that is coming in I would like to call attention to this word that grace saves. It says
{12}
in Titus, “the grace: of God which carries with it salvation.” What I apprehend grace to be is *supply*. Grace is known in what God makes available. The law demands, but grace supplies and grace saves. I am not speaking of the question of forgiveness of sins at the moment; I am speaking of the principle of grace saving. If you can bring in supply you will bring in salvation. If you bring in demand you really play into the hands of the enemy. God’s way of saving is by grace. He has brought in the greatest vessel of grace, Christ -- “full of grace and truth.” It says too, “For of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace.” I would like to convey to our hearts some sense of the supply that is in Christ, for it is as apprehending, and coming into touch with, the supply that we are saved. As it says “Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy.” We may have supply for any time of need. In the blessed Person of Christ, in whom dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, there is a supply for every situation that ever arises amongst God’s people, and all we have to do is to tap the supply. If we get in touch with the supply then we are saved. That is how God has acted towards us and it is a principle that is always true. What is needed amongst the people of God, what is needed in this city, and in every subdivision, is supply. Mere criticism does not supply anything except a door to the enemy. Another has said “grace works by what it brings, not by what it finds.” The situation can be saved in every gathering if brothers and sisters will move on the line of grace, bringing in supply. Not that the supply originates with them, but as of the body every one of us is to be a joint of supply. In the Head is the supply, but every brother and sister is to be a channel to carry the supply from Christ to the body. If I am not on that line I may easily be doing the devil’s work. The word of the destroyer, Apollyon, stands in contrast to salvation. Satan is destroying and God is saving, and He saves by grace. He brings in supply in Christ. Let
{13}
us not think any position is hopeless if we will turn to the source of supply, the Head of the body, the assembly, from whom the body draws through joints of supply. I put it to everyone in this room: Is my influence one of supply, or is it one of demand? Is it marked by criticism or disputing, or am I bringing in something positive? Anyone can pull down, but you can only build up with supply, and there is a source of supply in Christ, the Vessel of grace. “Of his fulness we all have received and grace upon grace.” That is, there is supply for every season. Whatever the season is, there is supply for that season. Scripture says “To every thing there is a season,” @Ecclesiastes 3: 1, and there is help available for every season at the throne of grace. The Lord help us to bring in this element of grace. God uses it for salvation.
I would now like to say a word about being *saved by faith*. Faith is that, with light in my soul, I see the vessel of grace. In the gospel of Luke the Lord is the great Vessel of grace and four times in that gospel I think it says “thy faith has saved (or healed) thee.” Faith saves us still. Faith operates to lay hold of what is in Christ, whatever the need may be. In one case it was a woman in the city who was a sinner. In spite of all her sins, which were many, she touched the source of supply and Lord said to her “Thy faith has saved thee.” In another case it was the leper with all the dreadful result of sin working in his being. He was the one of the ten that came back to give thanks. The Lord says to him “thy faith has made thee well.” Faith saves from sins, faith saves from leprosy. Another case is the woman with the issue of blood, in all her weakness and helplessness, she touched the border of his garment. She drew from the vessel of grace and the Lord says to her “thy faith hath made thee whole.” Contact with and faith in Christ saves. The last case I remember is the blind man. The Lord says to him, “What wilt thou that I shall do unto thee?” And he said, “Lord, that I may receive my sight,” and the Lord says, “thy faith hath saved thee.” If we are
{14}
not saved practically from our sins, from activity of sin, from the helplessness natural to all, and from the darkness that so often enshrouds, it is because faith is not operating. Faith in Christ gives access to the grace that saves. I commend this to everyone in difficulties: living faith in Christ, the blessed Head of the assembly, will save us. Give up faith and we make shipwreck.
I would like now to say a word as to *baptism saving us*. I speak of this feelingly as looking into the faces of many young men and women here. I would bring this under your notice, baptism saves. Those of us who are a little older can tell you by experience that baptism saves us. The apostle Peter refers to Noah, one of eight; “Wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water.” The water that overwhelmed the corrupt and violent world of that day was salvation to those eight souls. So also the water of the Red Sea saved Israel. They never saw their enemies again. The apostle Peter says baptism saves us. The Lord indeed gives the root of this in the gospel of Mark, “He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved.” Many Christians reverse that passage and read it, “He that believeth and is saved shall be baptised.” But the Lord does not say that, nor Peter, but “He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved.” Not saved for heaven, we do not want salvation in heaven, there are no enemies there. God is in heaven and Christ is in heaven. We want salvation here in this world. Baptism looks upon us as in this world. The god and the leader of this world is the devil. He is the one who is worshipped and leads the world. I am not referring to governments, I am referring to the great moral system of this world marked only by lust and pride. How can we be saved from it? By being baptised. What does that mean? It is a matter of reckoning, as @Romans 6 says. In our minds we take up the position of being buried. In yonder cemetery, Rookwood, the power of this world, its lust and its pride, its literature, its pleasures, its money, has absolutely no meaning. Not one buried there can ever
{15}
again be influenced by the world. Baptism means that, in my mind, I take up that position. That is salvation. Young people will understand I am not speaking of what is of the earth, our food, our clothes and physical creation. I am speaking of the vast system of this world. If we reckon, according to the truth of baptism, to be buried by baptism, we will be saved from the world. Our enemies can have no power over us, any more than they can have over those buried at Rookwood. The lust of the flesh, or the eye, or the pride of life do not appeal to one person in Rookwood. These evil principles have no power there because all in that place are buried. This is a matter to reach in our minds. Baptism saves us. As we face the rising tide of wickedness in this world we shall need to know more about baptism, recognising that we are dead to sin and alive to God through Jesus Christ. “Buried with him by baptism unto death.” Be assured that baptism saves. As the true meaning of it is accepted, it has wonderful power to save us from the world. The Lord help us to be true to it.
I would now pass on to being *saved through the fire*. This is a very solemn word. The fire is going to “try every man’s work of what sort it is.” It is well for us to line ourselves up alongside this word. The fire of God’s holiness that operates eternally -- our God being a consuming fire -- is going to test every man and all his, work that he has brought to the house of God. The apostle has a building in mind: “I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon. But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon. For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.” “Let every man take heed *how* he buildeth.” The fire is brought to bear on the gold, the silver, the precious stones, but they remain what they are. The fire is brought bear upon the wood, the grass, the straw, and they disappear. “If any man’s work shall be burned he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.” He must go through the fire himself so that nothing
{16}
comes out but a personality that is of God, all else having disappeared. This principle of fire is a saving principle. It says “everyone shall be salted with fire.” What for? To check the working of corruption. Fire is connected with the thought of salt, it is what God uses to salt us. The holy judgment of God, and what He is in His holiness must salt every one of us if we are to be saved. Every sacrifice is to be salted with salt and every one of us salted with fire so that corrupting things and their activities so natural to us are nullified in the salt of the fire. Let each ask himself: Am I bringing gold into the building -- that which is of God and for His glory? Does what I am doing contribute to God’s glory? If it is so it will stand the fire. Am I bringing in silver? Am I contributing to that which maintains the absolute authority of the Lord over us, as having bought us? That will stand. Am I bringing precious stones? It does not say what they are here but other scriptures help us as to that. @Revelation 21 says “the first foundation was jasper,” that which is crystal, transparent. It goes under the fire of God and remains. It is a feature of God, “God is light and in Him is no darkness at all.” The fire is going to remove everything that is not transparent with us. Let us accept this now. Wrong motives secretly held, wrong feelings, secret resentments, are all to be burned up by the fire. Let us be salted with fire now and not wait until the day when we must face the fire of God’s holiness.
The second stone is sapphire, the colour of heaven. That stone will never be destroyed by the fire. It represents subjection: “Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.” Bring in subjection to the Lord, to God, to one another; the fire will not burn up the sapphire. I do not proceed, but every precious stone will stand the fire. Let us all see that we are bringing in the manifold graces of Christ.
The wood might be cedar, or oak, but in this connection it represents what is only of man however honourable in the eyes of men. There will not be a trace of the wood when the fire tests it.
{17}
Grass! Man in his own pettiness is the grass. When the fire touches the grass what is left? Stubble or straw represents what is dead and therefore worthless. How quickly will fire remove stubble. When such things have marked our work all that will remain is the person. I only call attention to that: his works are burnt, yet he is saved, but so as through the fire. He himself is to go through the fire of what God is in His holiness, before he is available to the divine system.
I pass on now to this magnificent word in @Psalm 80 “turn us again.” Three times it is spoken. Salvation is connected with turning again. Where should any of us be if we had not been turned again, and how many times the precious grace of God has turned us again, or “restored” as it says in the New Translation. The shepherd activities of Christ are ever towards us to restore us. How often we go the wrong way, but the Lord is ever active in His grace to “turn us again.” I beg everyone not to resist His appeals to turn again from the path you are on with your back to Christ. That is what it amounts to. “Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts, cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.” I do not think we are fully enjoying salvation unless the face of Christ shines on us. What do we see as we turn again? Another glimpse of His blessed face. Why go the wrong way and lose the shining of His face? As we turn again we are saved in the power of that shining. And we shall need it, dear brethren. There is a word that is coming into use in the world and that is “glamour.” There is an awful glamour abroad and men are boasting in it. A shining that is not real. People are living in the glamour that originates with the devil. Salvation is in “the effulgence of His glory.” The lustre, the brightness, the shining in the face of Jesus of what God is, will save us from the glamour of this world. We need to turn again. There is a beautiful word that says, “Return unto me, and I will return unto you.” As we give up our own wills and turn again then God will turn round and shine upon us.
{18}
So that three times in three connections each full of instruction in this wonderful Psalm it says, “Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts, cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.” The only salvation in our day from the glamour of this world is the shining of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, as the poet says --
<blockquote>“What has stripped the seeming beauty,<br>From the idols of the earth?<br>Not the sense of right or duty,<br>But the sight of peerless worth.<br>¬Tis the look that melted Peter,<br>¬Tis the face that Stephen saw,<br>¬Tis that heart that wept with Mary,<br>Can alone from idols draw ...<br>Draw, and win, and fill completely,<br>Till the cup o’erflow the brim;<br>What have we to do with idols,<br>Who have companied with Him?” </blockquote>
I am sure that, if this war is allowed to come to an end, there will be a period of glamour such as never has been, and our salvation will be as we see the face of Christ, constantly turning again to see it.
There is much more, dear brethren, that God uses for our salvation. We are saved by confession, “with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.” We are saved by keeping in company with the people of God. “I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.” If you stay at home, murmuring and grumbling, you are on the road to be lost; keep with the sheep, if you would be saved. I beg none of you to stay away from the people of God. “If anyone enter in by me, he shall be saved.”
I trust it is clear that God is our Saviour God, and He has a vast range of things through which He saves us, if we on our side are prepared to turn to Him and draw from the great fountain that is in Christ.
{19}
“IDENTIFICATION WITH CHRIST”
@Galatians 2: 20; @1 Thessalonians 4: 14 - 18
What I have to say relates to the thought of being “with the Lord.” How little we take in the glorious prospect of being with Him. I suppose nothing is more precious to our hearts than that we are to be always with Him. The few moments that we enjoy of special nearness to Christ would surely give us some little impression of what it must be to be always with Him. This is the Lord’s desire, as He said to His Father, “Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me.” I desire with the Lord’s help to indicate something of the road that leads to being with Him. Most Christians have some knowledge that we are to be with Him, and look forward to that day, but I feel that we but feebly understand the road to that blessed end. I have read these two passages, one speaking of our initial identification with Him, and the other -- the final one -- our being actually with Him: I desire to touch on what lies between.
I believe our first identification with Christ is in what the Apostle says, “I am crucified with Christ.” We have not known Christ after the flesh, and those who did henceforth know Him thus no more for ever. There were those who were with Him here. What profound privilege was theirs. Two of them said to the Lord on one day, “Master, where dwellest thou?” He said, “Come and see” and it says they “abode with Him that day.” I am sure that day stood out to them because of impressions received in their hearts. One day with Him! The Lord in grace truly sojourned with men, but they spent one day with Him. Later the Lord chose twelve “that they might be with him.” For the greater part of three and a half
{20}
years there were twelve with Him -- “Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations,” as He says afterwards. What they gathered up, who can tell! They share with us what they can. As John says, “That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, that which we contemplated, and our hands handled,” not “he” but “that.” That is, they had come in touch with substance to engage their minds, their eyes, and their hands and they say, we declare it to you, that you might have fellowship with us. That is their unique part. The twelve have their own distinctive part for they were with Him here in His flesh and blood conditions. *We* begin in the passage I have read in Galatians, “I am crucified with Christ.”
I would say a few words about being *crucified* with Him, about having *died* with Him, about being *buried* with Him, about being *raised* with Him; and then as on that platform say a word about *suffering* with Him, *walking* with Him, *supping* with Him, *sitting* with Him -- not that I could say much about these, but I believe that these positions lead to our being with Him for ever. If we are not prepared to start at the first position we will not enjoy some realisation now of the last. The apostle Paul says, “I am crucified with Christ.” He had no link with Christ after the flesh. He begins his identification with Christ as placing himself alongside Christ on the cross. I would commend that to all of us. If we are to enter into the great and holy things that can be enjoyed with Christ, we must be with Him as crucified. It is, of course, not a question of what is literal, but of what is reached in the mind. Paul speaks of reckoning. I would like to have seen where and how he worked things out. Again and again he says, “I reckon.” That is to say, conclusions were reached in his mind, and one conclusion is that, because of what he was after the flesh, what he knew himself to be, he put himself alongside of Christ on the cross. I fear we understand little of the meaning of the cross. It signified that man is lifted up from the
{21}
earth as unfit to be on it, and is thus exposed in shame and dishonour and subject to the curse of God. Paul says, “I am crucified with Christ.” “I,” not some part of me. He had learned what his own heart was to such an extent that he says, I am unfit to be on the earth, and I place myself alongside of Christ crucified. It is our weakness at this point, dear brethren, that robs us of the enjoyment of what lies beyond. Let us judge self-complacency, and accept that, after the flesh, our place is alongside of Christ on the cross, for He was there for us. Paul makes it a personal matter, though he does not overlook that everyone else is the same as he, for he says “our old man is crucified with Christ.” He extends this thought to all of us; the moral being we have derived from Adam fallen can only be dealt with by crucifixion. We need to pay more attention to this truth. The spring of true unity lies in accepting our place with Christ as crucified. The end is that we are to be caught up *together* to be with Him. If each arrives at this, that the only way for what I am to be dealt with is that I am crucified with Christ, how it must promote unity. Self-vindication, self-seeking, self-righteousness, will soon disappear if I come to this, “I am crucified with Christ.” That is the only way to deal with what I discover myself to be. This the starting point on the road that leads to being “always with the Lord.”
The next thought is that we have *died* with Christ from the elements of the world. In his mind Paul not only accepted that he should be alongside Christ as crucified, lifted up in shame, dishonour and condemnation, but that his life in this world should be terminated. Death is the termination of our life here. Paul says, I am alongside Christ in this position. I crave that we might all reckon like that. The closing up of the life of Jesus involves, in our reckoning, that our life is terminated in respect of the elements of this world. If we think together in this matter, how it will promote unity. If everyone here accepts the first, “crucified with Christ,” and, then the
{22}
second, “died with Him,” we would be on the road that leads to a unity that is of God. The elements of the world have no application to a dead man. Paul accepts that the death of Christ was for him, his life is thus terminated in regard to the elements of this world.
But then in the same Epistle, as also in Romans, he says, “*buried* with him.” Paul, as it were, comes to the grave of Jesus and places himself with Christ in that grave. “Buried with him.” What does burial mean? Crucifixion means that I am unfit to be on the earth and am exposed under the judgment of God; death means my life here is terminated; but burial means that even so I must disappear, be put out of sight. Oh! dear brethren, that we were all of one mind in this matter “buried with him!” Now much there is that needs burying. Every feature of the flesh needs burying, not only needs to be crucified and dead, but buried. It is to be noted that the chapter in Genesis which speaks so much of going up to the house of God, is a chapter of many burials, for if God is to be served in His house many burials must take place. How much must be put out of sight. Abraham says, “That I may bury my dead out of my sight.” The Apostle Paul disappears from his own sight, as a man after the flesh, in burial. But these exercises are only the beginning of the great road that leads to being always with Him.
The next step is, “If ye then be *risen* with Christ,” @Colossians 3: 1. What a wonderful thought that is. Now it is not Christ crucified, Christ in death, Christ in the grave: we have already been identified with Him thus, but alongside of Him now as “risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead,” @Colossians 2: 12. Some of us have been speaking of those wonderful forty days in which Christ was known as risen from the dead. How wonderful those forty days when He assembled with them. One longs to enjoy more what relates to Him risen. It says, “being seen by them during forty days, and speaking of the things which
{23}
concern the kingdom of God; and being assembled with them,” @Acts 1: 3, 4. One great subject engaging us as risen is “the kingdom of God.” The Lord also speaks then of the Holy Spirit that should come as the power to enjoy what belongs to the resurrection realm. In @John 21 Peter says “I go a fishing.” One of the days when he might have realised the blessed company of Christ risen he says “I go a fishing.” And Nathanael and Thomas and Zebedee’s two sons and two others say, “We also go with thee.” What a humbling exposure. Think of using one of such days to go fishing. As risen with Him, each day is of great value, and yet some of us still go fishing. It may be that we fish for earthly things and miss through them what we might enjoy of the company of Christ. Many have turned away from the truth of the assembly, where Christ’s presence is known, to conduct gospel campaigns. I am not speaking against the preaching of the gospel, but many have turned from where the presence of Christ may be realised to fish for men. Others seek a place for themselves and thus miss the presence of Christ. The position reached in our meditations is that the saints are now in view as risen with Him, living in that realm in which He is “the firstborn from the dead,” @Colossians 1: 18. That position makes way for the greatest possible privileges.
We are now in line to *suffer* with Him, not suffer for Him in this connection; though that is a great privilege too, but suffer with Him. The Apostle Paul says, “If indeed we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him,” @Romans 8: 17. I believe the Lord is longing for this feature to mark His own: that we suffer with Him, as sharing His feelings. They are portrayed to us when He was there, but He still has them. What are His feelings in respect of the sorrows of the saints? The Lord would have us alongside of Him in our feelings. Think of the sorrows that abound amongst the saints today, the variety of them, the depth of them, and how the Lord feels them. It is said, when He saw Mary weeping and
{24}
the Jews with her weeping, that Jesus wept; showing that He is moved by the sorrows His people pass through; He would have us suffer with Him in such holy things. Then what are His feelings in relation to the state of His people? As He looked on Jerusalem, He wept over that city, showing what He feels as to the conditions amongst His people, surely true now as to the state of the assembly. Do we suffer with Him as to the state of the assembly? That is what He seeks. What are His feelings about mankind? When the Lord found a man who was deaf and could not speak right it says He groaned, or “sighed deeply.” Are we suffering with Him in His feelings in relation to man? It is only as we travel the road that I have indicated we can know anything about suffering with Him.
This way leads to another great and wonderful position. The Lord speaks of those who “*walk* with him.” “Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy,” @Revelation 3: 4. Christ and the overcomer walk together. I think it is clear there have always been those who walk with God and specially so at the end of every dispensation. I do not know anything greater than Enoch walking with God for 300 years. In the midst of a world that was more corrupt than we have any conception of, here is one who walks with God. Noah too, walked with God. At the end of the assembly’s history the Lord has in mind that there should be those who “walk with him.” It is evident Enoch walked in white: his garments must have been pure, else he could never have trodden the same path as God walked in. The Lord conveys His mind to those who walk with Him. I do not think we know all that God told Enoch. We could not suggest that God was silent for those 300 years. The veil is lifted once, and Enoch prophesies, “The Lord has come amidst his holy myriads,” @Jude 14. God told him that He would come with myriads to execute judgment, it is as though it has come to pass in
{25}
Enoch’s soul, for he says “Behold, the Lord *has* come amidst his holy myriads,” showing how final the word of the Lord is to Him. That is surely a sample of what must have taken place during that long walk with God. How great the privilege to walk with Christ. It is not here that He walks with us: what grace marked Him in walking with those two going to Emmaus; but He has in mind that we should walk with Him on the same road that He is on, walking together in holy communion. “Can two walk together, except they be agreed?” Think of Christ and the overcomer being entirely of one mind. God and Enoch were entirely of one mind for 300 years. The Lord would have this feature that we should walk with Him in white.
That leads us to the word of Christ to the assembly of the Laodiceans. “If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me,” @Revelation 3: 20. I do not speak about “will sup with him” now, but as to “he with me.” At the end of the assembly’s history the Lord is, outside the door in the profession, knocking, calling on any one heart to open to Him. Think, dear brethren, of what it must to sup with Him, to eat the same fare as He eats, to enjoy what He enjoys, who could speak of this? Lazarus no doubt illustrates it. “Lazarus was one of them that sat at the *table with him*,” @John 12: 2. You might say it was Lazarus’s house, and Christ was with him, but Scripture does not put it that way. The Lord really provided the fare on that august occasion. Lazarus was with Him at the table. The Lord would give us access to this great privilege of supping with Him at the close the day, enjoying what He is enjoying.
The last thought in this scripture is of *sitting* with Him. “To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne,” @Revelation 3: 21. It is not yet a matter of reigning with Him but of companionship with Him in a most exalted place. Not *on* the throne yet, but sitting alongside of Christ *in* His throne, in that place of exaltation,
{26}
in nearness to and communion with Him there.
This line will soon issue in those who can reign with Him. “Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: ... they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him,” @Revelation 20: 6. The Lord will publicly associate such with Himself when He reigns. How important that we should be with Him in the rule that He now maintains amongst God’s people.
The scripture in Thessalonians indicates that we are to be actually with Him always, and in the greatest nearness that can be conceived. The figure used in @Revelation 21 is that of a wife and a bride. The wife refers to the inner, private, holy intimacy and communion with Christ, which is the portion of the assembly. How little we take in such a thought. “His wife hath made herself ready,” @Revelation 19: 7. As the bride, she is to be with Him publicly, His companion, known as His. “Come hither, and I will show thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife,” @Revelation 21: 9. This nearness is eternal. Scripture says, “I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea. And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband,” @Revelation 21: 1 - 2. This is being *with Him* on the most exalted level, in the greatest intimacy that can be conceived and that for ever: “so shall we ever be with the Lord.”
I desired to speak thus to our hearts and consciences of this great subject. We must not think of these things as automatic, that will be true somehow inevitably. The way to the present enjoyment of them is the road I have indicated. We begin as in genuineness we arrive at “I am crucified with Christ.” Do we know our own hearts like that? No other way could effectively deal with what I am. Then we have “died with Christ” from the elements of the world. Have we put ourselves alongside of Christ in that position? Then “buried with Him”, recognising that what we are after the flesh can only be fully dealt
{27}
with as buried, as out of sight for ever, making way for the power of God to operate in our souls so that we know what it is to be “risen with him”, and as on that platform to enter into these holy things: to suffer with Him, to walk with Him, to sup with Him, to sit with Him, and to be in the nearest place to His heart for ever and ever.
I commend the road to all. It is a road that calls for constant exercise, constant facing of these things in our minds, so that in the judgment that we reach of ourselves it is true, and by the Spirit’s power we may enjoy what it is to be with Him at the present time. May it be so for His Name’s sake.
{28}
“THE LAST”
@1 Corinthians 15: 1 - 8, 21 - 26, 45 - 58
The thought that I desire to engage our minds and hearts with stands related to the fourfold expression in this chapter of what is “last”. This thought is one of the most solemn considerations that we can take account of, for “*last*” means that there is nothing to follow. *First* is the opposite; what is first implies that other persons or things may follow, perhaps almost limitless in number. But what is last involves finality, and is a solemn, though, in some respects, a most blessed consideration. Scripture speaks of the “last days”; it says, “God ... hath in these last days spoken”, @Hebrews 1: 1, 2, meaning that this is the closing period of the divine testimony. Scripture also speaks of “the last day”, which means the final day when time ceases. There will be a day that will be the last day, when days terminate; for a day implies time. What a consideration that is! The last day! The apostle John refers to “the last hour”, “Little children,” he says, “it is the last hour”; the present period has run out so far that the last hour has come.
Some of us look back with solemnity to the last of those we have loved. The last day, the last hour, of those we loved live in our minds all our days, and rightly so. The last words that are uttered are often treasured, as with David, “Now these be the last words of David”, @2 Samuel 23: 1.
Coming to these scriptures, I would speak of “last” in the four connections in which it is found. First, the apostle makes clear that he was the last to see Christ, as he says, “Last of all he was seen of me”. He is the last witness to see Christ risen. I would say a word, too, as to the “last enemy”. What a thought that is! The last enemy is to be destroyed or annulled, so that what is in
{29}
view is that there is never to be another enemy; what a joy that is! Then I would say a word about “the last Adam”, and I hope to show that there could not be another. Finally a word about “the last trumpet”, following which there will never be another trumpet for us, never another call or rallying again. There will come a moment when the last trumpet will sound.
I trust that these four thoughts are clear to all of us. First the apostle Paul makes clear that he was the last to see Christ, and I want to show why. It says of Christ in resurrection that He appeared first to Cephas. What abundant testimony there is of His resurrection; the first to see Him in this scripture is Cephas. What Peter could tell us if we could get alongside of him; what impressions he must have had from that appearing. What grace that Christ should appear first to Peter. Then He appeared to the twelve. Each would thus get an impression of Christ, fitting them for their part in the administration of what is of God.
Later, He appeared to “above five hundred brethren at once.” What spiritual wealth lay in these five hundred brethren that had seen Christ risen from the dead. The apostle Paul valued that five hundred, for he noted when any of them died, for he said, “Of whom the most remain until now”. I have no doubt that the apostle Paul delighted to talk to each one of them as he had opportunity. “Then he appeared to James”, one who was going to suffer for his testimony, who was beheaded. I doubt if we can suffer for Christ without a personal impression of Christ. Then He appeared to all the apostles, not the twelve here, but all the apostles, so that they might speak with authority. Then Paul says, “Last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.” I have no doubt the reference is to Paul actually seeing the Lord in some way, not only in faith; we all see Him in faith as it says, “But we see Jesus, who was made some little inferior to angels on account of the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour”, @Hebrews 2: 9.
{30}
We see Him thus in the faith of our souls, but Paul saw the Lord differently from this, I think. When did he see Him? Not on the earth, but as the Centre of a world of glory. A light above the brightness of the sun at midday blinded him to everything here. He saw Him, as the Centre of an eternal world, outside this scene altogether, and that is final. There could not be another witness to follow Paul. The last testimony as to Christ is that He is “On the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens”, @Hebrews 8: 1, the great Centre of another world. We would love to speak with the apostles and hear what they had to say about the Lord Jesus here; “that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled”, @1 John 1: 1. Who would not listen to John speaking of the blessed sojourn of Jesus here in flesh and blood? who would not listen to Cephas and James as they spoke of Jesus here in resurrection for forty days? But finality is when as glorified in heaven He is the Centre of another world, and Paul is the witness as to this, “Last of all he was seen of me”.
It is remarkable how quickly Paul “Preached Jesus that he is the Son of God”, @Acts 9: 20, which preaching involves another world. I think everyone must see that the Son of God involves another world. As the Son of God He is the Beginning and Centre of another world, and Paul preached Him thus in Damascus. Those that kept with Paul in the shipwreck were saved: he would bring them into the light of another world. What we need in the present shipwreck of this world is a glimpse of Christ as the Centre of another world. That position is final, there is nothing to follow, “Last of all he was seen of me”.
I pass on to the second thought, “The last enemy that is annulled is death”. I think that is a magnificent statement. The Lord is going to deal with the last enemy.
{31}
There are many other enemies in the way of the people of God. One great enemy is Egypt and its power. The world is not the last enemy, it is probably the first that Christian has to meet. As soon as a person is converted this world confronts him as an enemy, and the Lord deals with that enemy; it says, “Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore”. But it is not long before another enemy comes along, namely Amalek, the flesh in us. How often he appears, how we have combated him, at times almost to despair; the flesh operating in us and Satan using it until we say, “O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me?”, @Romans 7: 24. Sihon is another enemy, and Og is another. Sihon representing man’s bigness, and Og representing man’s slothfulness. What enemies they are! But they are dealt with. I refer now to “the last enemy”. The suggestion is, I think, to the final power in the way of the people of God reaching God’s thoughts. Egypt is dealt with, and Amalek is dealt with; Sihon and Og are slain and the Midianites fought with, but there is the Jordan, the great final barrier to the entrance into God’s land, and the Lord disposes of that enemy, the last enemy. What a wonderful thing it is to know that death is going to be destroyed, that which separates our souls, and indeed our bodies even, from reaching the great eternal thoughts of God, is going to be annulled; Christ will introduce the people of God into a realm where there is no enemy. In the new heaven and the new earth there will never be an enemy, for the last enemy is destroyed. What a wonderful thing to know that to the ages of ages there will not be an enemy of God, or of God’s people, in heaven or on earth, every enemy having been disposed of including death. The Lord dealt with death personally. He says, “O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be the destruction”, @Hosea 13: 14. How the Lord would endear Himself to our hearts as the destroyer of the last enemy, so that we may have part in the eternal realm where everything is according to God.
I move on to the thought of “the last Adam”. All
{32}
these final thoughts are in this resurrection chapter, for resurrection is the doorway to finality. The thought of the last Adam, of course, links itself with the first Adam by way of contrast. The first Adam was made a living soul. I do not think any of us take in how great a man Adam was; he was probably the greatest man that ever lived on the earth in the way of intelligence, for he was truly God’s image and made in His likeness. Adam was formed by God and endowed with qualities that fitted him to be God’s representative on the earth, and in addition to that he was like God; not physically like Him, but like Him in character, the likeness is moral. God is a Spirit, hence no human mind could compass the form of God. Scripture does speak of the form of God, but it is outside the range of the creature to understand it -- God being a Spirit. Nevertheless, Adam was made in God’s likeness for he was like God in that he was marked by wisdom, intelligence, affections, and feelings, that stand in contrast to the lower creation; all this he had by the work of God, for he was made a living soul by God’s breathing into him, one of the most intimate transactions of which we can take account. God breathed into his nostrils, as it were God put Himself alongside man in a personal sense and communicated life to him, making him a living soul. But when we think of the first Adam, what thoughts come into our minds as to unfaithfulness to his trust. It says, “By one man sin entered into the world”. Adam brought in lawlessness, and through lawlessness, death. The first Adam, the first head of the human race, brought in lawlessness as departing from God, and with lawlessness came death, and it is not long in the Scripture record until we read of Adam, “and he died”; he lived nine hundred and thirty years and he died. That head died never to reappear as head again. “The last Adam” means that there will never be another. Why? Because there will never be need of another head, the last Adam will hold the position for God as Head for all eternity, never failing, and never weakening in it; Scripture says, “Who
{33}
is the image of the invisible God.” Christ is that, He is last Adam, and He is God’s representative in the universe, the exact expression of His substance. Nowhere does it say that He is like God. That would not be in keeping with the truth, because He *is* God. In manhood, He “is the image of the invisible God, first-born of all creation”, @Colossians 1: 15, the great Leader of creation, and He will never, never fail in His headship, blessed be His name. So that He is the last Adam, there never will be another head. Think of people going out of this world in disregard of the last Adam!
I desire to show that the last Adam takes upon Himself all that the first Adam brought in, and bears its burden. The last Adam shoulders the whole burden of the actions of the first Adam, as this chapter shows: “Christ died for our sins ... and ... was buried”. Sins, judgment, death, burial, are the accumulated consequences of the fall of the first Adam. The last Adam takes the whole burden on Himself, at the cross, and in the grave, bearing it all, coming out of death in the power inherent in Himself and as in resurrection He imparts life to all who believe in Him. The last Adam is a life-giving spirit, is not that marvellous? The last Adam is such that He would take the whole of the consequences of the first Adam’s fall, and bear them away; then coming up out of death He communicates life to His own. He breathes into them. What God did in respect of Adam, Christ, the last Adam, does in respect of everyone who puts their trust in Him. He breathes into them. It is noteworthy that He never did this when in flesh and blood, I would say reverently that He could not do so until He had borne the burden of the guilt, the death, and the burial, that lay upon man, but one of His first acts in resurrection was that He breathed into His disciples and said, “Receive the Holy Spirit”, @John 20: 22. He imparted thus His own life as the last Adam. Who would ever want another? There could not be another. Men who reject Christ will go into outer darkness under the judgment
{34}
that sin has brought upon them through the first Adam because of their rejection of the last Adam. Let no one imagine that there will be another Adam available to man. Christ is the head of every man, and He is a life-giving spirit, a glorious title. Adam lived because God breathed into him, we live because Christ has breathed into us. He is great enough to impart life. Adam could never communicate life, but Christ is a life-giving spirit, having borne the judgment that the first Adam brought in on man through sin.
One more thought is “the last trump”. This implies that there have been other trumpets. The children of Israel were to make two silver trumpets which were used to call the people together. The first trumpet we hear today is the call to repentance in the Gospel. “God ... now commandeth all men everywhere to repent”, @Acts 17: 30.
The sound of the trumpet may be heard in many connections. Normally the believer hears the trumpet calling him to assemble weekly to remember the Lord. I trust everyone in this room listens to that appeal from the silver trumpet. Silver indicates the redemptive rights of the Lord over us. Other times the trumpet may blow an alarm because of something happening that endangers the people of God. The blast is then heard calling the people together to judge evil. How important that we should heed such a trumpet.
When they came together in relation to the burnt-offering and the peace-offering, they were to blow the trumpet. The calls to fellowship meetings are like trumpets rallying the people of God together. But I am speaking now of “the last trump”, the final trumpet, after which, for us, there will never be another. What a sound that will be! In the epistle to the Thessalonians it is called the trump of God; it says, “The Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel’s voice and with trump of God”, @1 Thessalonians 4: 16. Not Moses now, not the priest, but God Himself will cause the blast to be
{35}
heard, as the word here says, “We shall not all fall asleep -- we shall all be changed, in an instant, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet.” There will go out a call from God through Christ and the sound will reach the dead in Christ. All that are Christ’s, that have died, will hear it; every living saint on the earth will hear it, for the apostle says, “We shall not all fall asleep, but we shall all be changed”. That trumpet will call the dead in Christ from the grave, and will call the living that remain, and all will be caught up together. There will never be another rally after that, for we will have passed beyond the sphere where we are rallied, to “be always with the Lord”. Surely the moment is imminent when that final blast from God will penetrate every Christian’s soul that lives, and be heard by every saint that has died.
These are final matters. Most in this country and throughout the earth are longing for the last day of this war. I remember well the last day of the last war, and what feelings filled the breast of every right-minded person when the last shot had been fired. These are small matters compared with what is final according to God. There God’s final testimony as to Christ glorified; there is last enemy to be annulled; there is the last Adam a life-giving spirit, and there is the last trumpet to be heard. After that trumpet we will never hear again a call to repentance, a call to the Lord’s supper, a call to an assembly meeting to judge evil; never again a call to a meeting for ministry, but to be always with the Lord. The Apostle adds these words. “Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord”. He urges us not to give up but to realise that we are in touch with finality, with what is last, and he urges the Corinthians to go on in the light and power of what is last. May we, too, continue steadfastly in the light of this.
{36}
VALLEYS
@Psalm 84: 5 - 7; @Hosea 2: 14 - 23; @Zechariah 1: 7 - 11
The object in reading these three scriptures is to speak of the reference to a valley contained in each. The first scripture refers to the valley of Baca, which means “weeping”; the second refers to the valley of Achor, which means “trouble”; the third, as in the New Translation, speaks of the “low valley”, or “the bottom”, as in the Authorised Version. The “low valley” is where the myrtle trees are, and where the horses and the rider are seen.
It is clear that God uses figures drawn from creation for our instruction; indeed, we must have such figures to understand what He would convey to us, because our thoughts are necessarily limited to what is intelligible to us in the creation. God frequently uses the thought of valleys to bring spiritual things before us, as, indeed, He does mountains. The mountains suggest what is elevated and strong, and where reserves are found. What great mountains are referred to in Scripture, such as mount Zion: “Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion,” @Psalm 48: 2. There is the mount of Olives, too, what a mountain! Many others also, indicating great spiritual elevations to which God would bring us, where we can view what is in the mind of God. On the other hand, the thought of the valley implies necessity to go down. I may say that fertility is generally in the valleys, and that is where the springs run and the rivers flow. What valleys there are, and all call for humility on our side to get the gain of what they represent.
I would refer to one or two we have to do with. There is “the valley of the shadow of death,” how important that we should recognise and have to do with that valley. To overlook that the shadow of death is on everything here, is not the way to spiritual progress, for we walk
{37}
through the valley of the shadow of death. Everything that is earthly in character is in the valley of the shadow of death. Scripture also speaks of “the valley of salt,” where we may find in abundance what is necessary to preserve. Great victories have been won in that valley by the people of God.
I would say a word about the valley of weeping, the valley of Baca, because God has allowed a great period of sorrow to come upon man, in which we have part. There are probably more tears being shed on earth today than ever before in the history of mankind, and God’s people, in common with all men, are in the valley of weeping. This valley will become a fertile place as we go down into it; it says, “Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee -- they, in whose heart are the highways. Passing through the valley of Baca, they make it a well-spring.” One cannot but feel intensely for those who are in that valley who do not know God, who do not have to do with God. The Psalmist speaks of the blessedness of those who trust in God, and “in whose heart are the highways.” This is a remarkable expression. The divine highways are in their heart. If we go down to the valley of weeping without the divine highways in our hearts, we will not be blessed. God would help us to have the divine highways our hearts, meaning that we love God’s highways.
I trust all here are prepared to make room in their heart for the divine highways. This is a day when highways, of great importance, for nations are competing for the highways. God has His highways, and He would have them in our hearts, that is, He would have us love them. What highways God has: The first, dear brethren, is the way of righteousness; it says, “he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness.” @Psalm 23: 3. Righteousness is, I believe, the first of the divine highways, and we want that highway in our hearts -- to love righteousness.
Another highway is “the way of holiness.” Holiness is more than righteousness, holiness is that evil is hated and good is loved. God wants us to have that highway
{38}
in our hearts. There is also “the way of peace,” what a magnificent road! the way of peace, the people of God are to be sons of peace, indeed peace is the effect of righteousness. An offshoot of the way of righteousness is the way of peace. Then there is “the way of truth” in contrast to what is false. The way of truth is to be in the heart, truth in the inward parts. All these highways converge into the “more excellent way,” the way of love.
Satan has his highways, too, dreadful paths they are, and all lead downward to “beneath”. The divine highways all lead upward to God, “the way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.” @Proverbs 15: 24. The devil has highways all converging upon hell, but God has His highways all converging towards Christ and leading above. Passing into the valley of weeping, the valley of Baca, as loving the divine highways, will result in that valley becoming a well. This means that the Spirit of God is there to support them in their tears; whether the tears are in relation to human suffering; whether they be tears in relation to household sorrow; or whether they be tears in relation to assembly sorrows; if the divine highways are in our hearts, that valley becomes a well, the Spirit of God being there to support us.
We can think of our Lord Jesus Christ going into such a valley. How He frequented the valley of Baca in the days of His flesh. He offered up strong, crying and tears in the days of His flesh; He was “a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief,” @Isaiah 53: 3. But the divine highways stand out in remarkable clarity in His heart: He loved righteousness, He loved truth, He loved peace, for He was the Prince of it, He loved holiness, He loved good. The Spirit of God was there to support Him, as Man, in the wilderness; it says. He “was led by the Spirit in the wilderness,” @Luke 4: 1. He was supported by the well in that valley. Thus shall we be if the divine highways are in our hearts when called to go down to the valley of weeping. Then it says, “the rain also filleth the pools.” That is to say, blessings from above fill our souls
{39}
so that conditions suitable for the harvest should be brought about.
I think most of us can say humbly that the periods of sorrow have been the periods when the support of the Spirit and the influence of heaven have been most realised, so that the soul becomes fertile for God. I refer to that because tears and sorrow are features of this day. God has allowed this valley to extend throughout the earth today as never before, and I would commend to everyone that as having the divine highways in our hearts we shall gain from the valley of Baca.
In regard to the dear young men placed in camps, I have no doubt that some of them will shed tears as they have to do with conditions so different from anything they have known, but if the divine highways are in their hearts: righteousness, holiness, peace, truth and love, I am sure that the Holy Spirit will be there to support them; the rain will fill the pools, and there will be a harvest for God.
I pass on from that to “the valley of Achor,” the valley of trouble. This valley is said to be “a door of hope.” In that valley sin is judged. To fail to judge sin is to be without hope. I know to do so means trouble. I refer first of all to what actually happened in that valley. God had ceased to support His people and they had turned their back to their enemies. When Joshua asked God what it meant, God said that Israel had sinned, they had stolen, they had dissembled, and He would not go on with them. Joshua sees that the matter must be faced, because to be without God is to be without hope; so every tribe is brought forward, then every family, then every household, and then every man, to locate who had stolen and dissembled. I have often thought of this as we come together to judge evil before God. This represents an exercise that God calls upon us to go through, when man by man we submit ourselves to the scrutiny of God. What must have been in the minds of many as they came up: will God disclose that I am the guilty one? There is no
{40}
escaping the eye of God, for everything is naked and open before Him with whom we have to do. Every man came before God to be scrutinised. When the matter came to a head in Achan, he acknowledged that he had taken the splendid Babylonish garment and the wedge of gold and the silver, and had buried them in his tent. Joshua faces this matter out; Achan is taken down to the valley of Achor, the valley of trouble, is stoned, and they raise a heap of stones over him which it says is there to this day.
Hundreds of years afterwards the Spirit of God, through the prophet Hosea, says that valley is a door of hope. We are to humbly go down and look at that heap of stones, underneath which lie the bones of a man who stole and dissembled. How often we have to locate these principles in our own hearts. What would he want with that garment? He intended one day to be seen in it, to parade himself in it. He intended to take the silver and the gold that was devoted to God to use it for himself. Dear brethren, it is great trouble to face these evil motives in our own souls. As judging ourselves, we do not want to appear in a garment that is not our own, and we do not want to steal what belongs to God. The Lord is calling on all of us to judge ourselves, and to go down into this valley with all the trouble and heart searching it causes. But the Lord says, “I will give her ... the valley of Achor for a door of hope.” The consequence of going into that valley is that she shall sing as in the days of her youth. What flows out of facing this matter in self-judgment is that we begin to sing; when we are going on with evil we never really sing, we may make a noise, but we never really sing. What marked her in her youth was that she sang, “I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously,” @Exodus 15: 1. She sang of the way the Lord had delivered her from Egypt, and she sang again in her youth, “Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it.” @Numbers 21: 17. The joy of being set free from the world and making room for the blessed Spirit is what marks the youth of the believer. What joy to be done with the
{41}
world’s system, and what joy to have a well springing up in our hearts to God.
If we go into the valley of Achor, and judge sin as God judges it, we sing again as in our youth, and what follows is that we call Christ “Ishi”, not “Baali”; Baalim or Baali involves idolatry. We call Him Ishi, that is “my husband”. This word is true for the individual, and it is true for the assembly. The seventh of Romans speaks of the believer being married to another -- Christ as the object of the believer’s heart. The allowance of sin robs us of the enjoyment of this, but the going into the valley of Achor restores it, so that we say to Christ “Ishi”, my Husband. The allowance of sin in the assembly would rob the assembly of the present joy of Christ as Head of the assembly, but judgment of sin by the assembly restores the enjoyment of Christ’s place as Head of the assembly.
I do desire to make self-judgment attractive to us, for it restores singing; it restores the joy of the relationship that exists between Christ and the individual believer, between Christ and the assembly; then, in addition, it says, “And in that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things.” God would put restrictions on powers that would destroy us, represented by the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, or the creeping things.
Finally it says, “I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear the corn, and the new wine, and the oil.” The issue is that God is in touch with His people, and they are in the enjoyment of the corn and the wine and the oil. The joy of spiritual things abounds, where there is self-judgment. If we are short of spiritual food, or spiritual joy and dignity, it is because we have not been frequenting “the valley of Achor.”
I trust that it is clear to us that the door of hope, found in the valley of Achor where evil is judged according to God, leads to singing; leads to that blessed word Ishi; leads to protection from the beasts, the birds and the creeping things, that are destroying Christendom. It
{42}
leads to a condition in which we secure the ear of God and also to abundance of corn, and wine, and oil. What possibilities there are available if we judge ourselves. The valley of Achor was the door of hope for the Corinthians, and also for the wicked person that was put away. Later, he, too, judged himself and was restored to the holy privileges available in the assembly. Do I speak to a brother or a sister who has stopped singing? Consider this “the valley of Achor for a door of hope: and she shall sing there, as in the days of her youth.” The Lord is willing to resume intimate relations with every believer and every assembly, based on self-judgment. He wants us to say to Him “my husband”, the most intimate relationship is available to persons who go down into the valley of Achor.
A few words now as to the last remarkable scripture. In the low valley, or bottom, there are myrtle trees. If the trees have become faded, if the leaves have withered, it is because they are not in the low valley. Every tree in the low valley is like myrtle, is green, fresh and living. It is when we get out of the position of humility and lowliness that the leaf withers away. Our blessed Lord always lived in the low valley when here. How He descended: He went down to Nazareth; He went down to Capernaum; He went down to the cross. He descended into the lower parts of the earth. He says, “I am meek and lowly in heart.” @Matthew 11: 29. He was always green, the greenest tree that ever lived. If we are to be green, and remain green, we need to learn from Him.
The prophet sees this vision at night, there are horses, there are myrtle trees, there is the low valley. What is learned in this low valley is that the horses are under control. God controls the movements of the nations and will not allow them to injure His people if in accord with the myrtle trees in the low valley. We learn more of these horses in chapter 6. Two of them go into the north country, with the result that God says they have quieted His spirit. He was disturbed by what had
{43}
taken place in the north country, and the black and the white horses are used governmentally deal with the north country. Others go to the south country, and others go through the earth wherever they will. In all movements the myrtle trees in the low valley are preserved. There is no suggestion that they are destroyed.
The horses represent the nations held under control by God. God will protect His people providentially, as suggested by the presence of the angel in the low valley. The Lord Jesus said to Pilate, “Thou hadst no authority whatever against me if it were not given to thee from above,” @John 19: 11. No Roman emperor or his governor could touch Him unless permitted by God. Our exercise is to be marked by life and humility. The low valley is where the prophet learns that the horses are under control; in the north country or the south country they may appear to do what they like, but in the low valley they are seen to be under control. The movements of the nations will not destroy God’s people if they have these features.
These are the thoughts I wish to present. The importance of the highways being in our hearts as entering the valley of weeping; thus we will have the support of the well and the rain. The valley of Achor, the valley of trouble, is where we judge evil, but it secures the greatest possible blessing from God. Finally, the low valley, the place of myrtle trees, is where no horse, however strong, will ever harm us. May the Lord help us to be steady as these great movements of the nations proceed, that we may be like the myrtle trees in the low valley and realise that God is controlling these horses.
{44}
GROWTH
@Colossians 1: 9, 10; @Psalm 144: 12; @Zechariah 6: 9 - 13; @Ephesians 4: 10 - 16
I have in mind to speak of the subject of growth. One is confident that the Lord has this specially in mind for His people now. What joy to think of the development of the work of God manifest when the Lord Jesus came in flesh. Think of such as Zacharias and Elizabeth, walking in all the ordinances of the law blameless; true priesthood was developed in them. Think of such as Simeon, who was marked by walking in the Spirit. It says, “He came in the Spirit into the temple”, @Luke 2: 27 -- not “*by* the Spirit”, but “*in* the Spirit”. Think of such as Anna, who continued night and day in prayers and fastings in the temple; of such a one as Joseph, “a righteous man” -- characterised by righteousness; of Mary -- “the bondmaid”, she says of herself, ready to surrender herself at all cost to the will of God. Think of the shepherds watching their flocks by night, faithfully serving in relation to what was entrusted to them, not drunken nor asleep in the night, but watching. These would show what development of the work of God in persons was ready to welcome Christ when He appeared. It says, “Once in the end of the world hath he appeared”, @Hebrews 9: 26. These matured saints were here to receive Him; Simeon indeed did so actually in his arms.
What a joy it is to witness growth. We cannot explain it; “he knoweth not how”. @Mark 4: 27, it says of the growth of the seed. But what a marvel to watch a plant develop, to watch an animal grow, to watch our children grow from babes. But how important must growth be in relation to what is spiritual and therefore eternal. It says of the lily, “Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow”, @Matthew 6: 28. They are only here for a few days and then they are gone; yet they grow, and how they grow! What consideration, therefore, is due to the growth of that which is going to be for the pleasure of God throughout eternity. Could there be
{45}
anything more important than to make room on our side for growth? Our time here is brief at best, when God is working in view of eternity, and I want to encourage every heart to make itself available to the matter of growth. Think of our blessed Lord in this matter -- not that He needed that anything should be added to Him, for morally and characteristically everything He was He brought into manhood. Nevertheless, the thought of growth in the unfolding of what was there in Him is found in Scripture.
The angel speaks to the shepherds of the Babe -- “Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger”, @Luke 2: 12. But he says of the Babe, “Unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord”, @Luke 2: 11. All was there -- the Saviour was there, the Christ was there, the Lord was there. But all awaited the unfolding of the wonderful fulness that was there, step by step, as to what was proper to each period of the life of Jesus. So we have the Babe, and what marked Him as the Babe was perfect and intelligent dependence on God. In relation to any of us there is absolute dependence in any babe with little or no intelligence as to it, but the Lord says, “I was cast upon thee from the womb”, @Psalm 22: 10. There was a conscious sense of dependence in Him as the Babe. We read of the young child Jesus, “the young child and his mother”, @Matthew 2: 21, and everything that is beautiful in a child finds perfect expression in the young child Jesus. We read of “the boy Jesus”, @Luke 2: 43, at twelve years of age, what is He doing? Perfect example for every boy and girl of twelve -- sitting in the temple with the doctors of the law, hearing, and asking questions. Perfect expression of what is proper at twelve, for by then it is known, or should have been known, that He was committed to His Father’s business. This was true always of Him, surely, but it should have been known, as the Lord says, “Wist ye not?” @Luke 2: 49. One would suggest that this is what is normal at twelve. It should be known that the boy or the girl is committed to the
{46}
interests of God and has his or her place in the temple, listening and enquiring. But then we have the Man -- “The man Christ Jesus”, @1 Timothy 2: 5 -- “beginning to be about thirty”, @Luke 3: 23, not to speak of that wonderful life lived in secret between twelve and thirty -- a secret history under the eye of God that produced on earth an Eden for the divine pleasure, in the light of which the first Eden yielded little for God. At thirty years and onward we have manhood. Each of the four gospels portrays perfectly four blessed features of manhood, the kingly features of Christ in Matthew; His readiness to serve everyone in Mark, the Vessel of divine grace in Luke, and the One who expresses divine love in John.
I want to say a word or two as to growth in relation to us, and I have read these scriptures to bring four thoughts before us. The first scripture indicates *how* we grow -- “growing by the true knowledge of God”, it says. The second scripture tells us *when* we grow -- “that our sons may be as plants grown up in their *youth*”. That specially is the time to grow. The third scripture tells us *where* we grow, where our blessed Lord grew indeed; and thus where we are to grow -- “he shall grow up from his own place”, whatever place that is. Finally, I would say a few words as to the goal of all growth, “till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ”. That is God’s terminus for His people. I trust these four thoughts will be clear to us, and that the Lord may help us to speak of them and to receive them.
First, dear brethren, growth is by the true knowledge of God. The knowledge of God there, is conscious knowledge of God. That is the source of growth. It is not casual knowledge, it is intimate knowledge in the soul, not merely in the mind or intellect. There is nothing more blessed than to know God. Let us dismiss from our minds anything else as being of greater importance, for the Scripture says, “Let not the wise man glory in
{47}
his wisdom”, @Jeremiah 9: 23. The human wisdom which any may gather in this world does not add one thing to his spiritual stature. “Neither let the mighty man glory in his might”; whatever development of physical power a man may secure adds nothing to him for eternity, to his spiritual stature. “Let not the rich man glory in his riches”; whatever accumulation of riches any may have, does not in itself add one thing to him spiritually. “But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me.” How small we feel when we face the fact that growth is by the true knowledge of God. But one is assured that God is working that we may know Him. He orders, no doubt, conditions that provide for our knowing Him.
I am sure that Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego, and later Daniel, would come out of testing days knowing God consciously. I am confident that God is ordering the present sorrows in view of the extension of our knowledge of Himself. One feels assured that those who go through the present conditions with God will come out of them with an increased knowledge of Himself, and thus with more stature to contribute to what is of God. Let us not be overwhelmed with anxiety or sorrow because of the perplexities and the distresses; God is using them to add conscious knowledge of Himself and thus that we may grow. That knowledge, of course, is brought to us in all its fulness in Jesus, as the apostle Paul indicates, “For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels”, @2 Corinthians 4: 6, 7. The treasure was the blessed light that had come into his soul that had brought the knowledge of God to him.
Before I leave this first passage I would remind you that another element that contributes to growth is the mental milk of the word, especially for babes. As the apostle Peter says, “As newborn babes, desire the sincere
{48}
milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby”, @1 Peter 2: 2. The word discloses the thoughts of God to us, and we cannot grow without the word coming into our mind. Food for the mind results in growth. I am conscious of the continual need of guarding our minds. Continually we need to turn to the word, to the Scriptures, of course, to the ministry of the word by the Spirit, to the blessed Person of Jesus our Lord who is the Word, for every thought of God contributes to growth as it is received as pure mental milk.
I pass on to what I specially would speak about -- *when* we grow. “That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth.” I want to say a few words to the youthful. Youth is a time of the very greatest importance, loss of which can never be replaced. Dear young brothers and sisters, the time when growth is specially looked for, is in youth. The Lord would stir your hearts that your youth be not wasted. The apostle speaks to Timothy as a young man. It is clear that Timothy used his youth to great advantage; he kept with the apostle Paul and accepted circumcision at the outset, the judgment of the flesh. Nevertheless Paul says to him, “Flee youthful lusts”. Every gratification of these will delay growth in the youth. You say, Where can I flee? First flee to the Lord. By fleeing, you recognise that you are no match for that from which you flee. You say, That is cowardly. Never mind, flee, do not stop to argue, do not try to meet the situation in your own strength. Flee; flee to the blessed Lord; He will help. Then flee to your brethren. It was those who lagged behind that the Amalekite got -- those in the rear, those who did not keep in touch with what was going on amongst the saints. The Lord would have us to use our youth as the time for growth.
What an example are those young men in Daniel’s day! They did not eat the king’s meat, nor drink his wine. The attitude of their mind was that they would not find their life and joy in what ministered to this
{49}
world. They purposed in their heart that they would not defile themselves with the king’s meat. They would have pulse and water, food that produces true substance, so that when they appeared before the king they were fairer and fatter than all others. Dear young men, I would bring to your notice the importance of youth. Look back over men of God, whom has God used? Men available in their youth: Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, Elisha, John the Baptist, Timothy. Look back over the history of those whom God has used in our day; they are men who grew up in their youth, and did not waste it. They made room for growth during the time when growth is normal. Let us not fill up our youth seeking to find gratification in this world, but let us find it in relation to what is of God.
The prophet Zechariah indicates *where* growth takes place, referring to the Lord personally, but bringing out great principle. It says of Him, “He shall grow up from his own place ... and he shall bear the glory”, @Zechariah 6: 12, 13. He accepted His place and remained there. What a place it was, Nazareth of Galilee! One of the most contemptible places in a contemptible area, in a contemptible province -- Jesus of Nazareth! The words from His own lips were, “I am Jesus of Nazareth”, @Acts 22: 8. It was not His selection, it was where the ordering of God placed Him. Joseph and Mary went down to Nazareth, and that was His place, and He grew up from His place. I beg every one of us, the young especially, to this come into our minds -- the place to grow is our *own* place; not another place, not another sub-division, not another house, not another occupation, not another city, not another country, not another hemisphere. “He shall grow up from his own place.” Depart from that, and I doubt if there will be much growth.
The Lord Jesus, of course, left Galilee; He came to Jerusalem. “He must needs go through Samaria.” But every movement from Nazareth was as *sent*. It is perfectly right to leave one place, or indeed one occupation, or if
{50}
need be, one hemisphere for another, if *sent*. Sent means you are under orders. It does not involve any will of your own in the matter. Jesus went from city to city, for He says, “therefore am I sent”. It is too late for some of us to profit by this word, it may be, but I beg the young to accept the place in which the ordering of God has sent them, whether it be the home or the family setting, the occupation, the subdivision, the city, or the country, where in the ordering of God you are. That is where you will grow. Many think, If only I could be somewhere else. You will never be in a worse place than Nazareth. That is where Jesus grew, from His place.
Some of the most humbling periods in my life have been when I took myself out of the hands of God, and I have seen the restless activity of will and discontent in others that would constantly change from one thing to another, one occupation to another, one city to another. The result is stagnation rather than growth. You will find that those whom God enlarges are those who quietly and consistently go on in their place, whatever that place is.
God’s ordering is in all these matters, as also in the service He would have us render. Philip was prospering in his service, but the angel of the Lord said, Go down to “the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza, which is desert”. He might have disputed that. The angel of the Lord represents God’s control of the position; His governing and ordering said, Go down to the way to Gaza, which is desert. When he arrived at the way to Gaza, the Spirit said, “Go near, and join thyself to this chariot”, @Acts 8: 29. That is to say, as submitting to God’s ordering in our circumstances, we are available to the Spirit for service. If Philip had refused the ordering of God through the angel, he would not have been a vessel that the Spirit would have used. I again would remind you of the great loss that many have suffered who have constantly changed their location, their occupation, their city, or their country, through some form of discontent with the ways of God. Such movements
{51}
hinder growth. God’s providential ordering today takes many of our brethren into military camps. I am sure they will grow there because it is their place in God’s ordering, not by their own choice. If it were the latter it would be intensely serious, but it is God’s ordering through His minister -- the government; it is for the time being *their* place, and it is where they will grow. We can be assured of this, that many will come out, if God orders that they should, with definite increase of stature.
A word now as to the great goal that God has in mind -- “until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ”, @Ephesians 4: 13. What a conception; “Till we all come”. God’s work will go on in view of all coming to this. All gift of any kind is an endowment by Christ, in view of all saints coming to maturity, to the full-grown man. What a fountain of supply is in Christ for this. The word goes on to speak of the supply -- “every joint of supply”, it says. The supply is in Christ. One and another in the body are joints to bring something from the Source of supply, but what a supply! Great enough to bring every saint on earth in the whole dispensation into maturity, and maturity involves correspondence with Christ, that “we may grow up to him in all things.” The blessed Lord Jesus is the Source of supply, great enough to affect His people in all things, excluding nothing, that we should derive from Him what will impress His character on all, and in all things. What a magnificent conception, that all should reach maturity, and that the impress of Christ should be on all things, that we should grow up to Him in all things.
One more word. The body builds itself up in love, and this growth of the body, “the assembly, which is His body”, @Ephesians 1: 22, 23, is by supply being brought into it through the joints and through the effectual working of each part. Now why should any of us exclude ourselves
{52}
from this blessed service? I appeal to every brother and sister here -- Why not be an active contributor? It is not because there is no supply, I am sure of that. “In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily”, @Colossians 2: 9. Ephesians speaks over and over again of His fulness, a magnificent word -- fulness! Draw all that you may, there is still fulness, there is no possibility of exhausting the fulness, as John says, “Of his fulness have all we received, and grace for grace”, @John 1: 16. But the drawing out from the fulness never reduces the supply; our side is the effectual working of each one part. What is so greatly needed is for each one part to operate as in touch with the supply. In spite of the weakness and public breakdown, what times we would have together if every brother and sister would make themselves available. Do not elect yourself out of this. “For he that hath, to him shall be given”, @Mark 4: 25. The more you tap the supply, the greater the sense you will get of its boundless reserves, and your joy will be great in being a joint to carry something for the body that will make for “its self-building up in love”.
I only call attention to this wonderful passage in relation to growth, “Till we all come ... “ There is enough in Christ to bring every saint on earth into maturity -- “Till we all come ... unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ”. Thus we are no longer babes tossed about by every wind of doctrine, by the cunning teachings of the apostate world around us, systematised error that holds men and takes their hearts away from thoughts of God and of Christ. As full grown men we are not swept away by these dreadful teachings, which @1 Timothy 4: 1 calls “doctrines of devils”. Not merely are they the thoughts of men’s minds, but they originate from satanic influences.
May the Lord help us, for we have but little time; at the longest we have but little. The apostle John says, “It is the last hour”, @1 John 2: 18. This period is closing rapidly, and I commend to every one of us here the matter
{53}
of growth: the source of it, the true knowledge of God inwardly; the time of it, specially in youth; the place of it, where God has put us; the end of it, conformity to Christ. May the Lord help us to make room for these thoughts, for His Name’s sake.
{54}
“BUT THEY CONSTRAINED HIM”
@Luke 24: 29, @Genesis 18: 1 - 8; @Judges 6: 11 - 21; @Judges 13: 8 - 20
The object in reading these three passages is to use them to indicate how we may detain Divine Persons -- a wonderful suggestion! In each of them there was the power to detain the heavenly Visitor. In the first, it was clearly God Himself as well as the angels; in the second, the angel seems to give place to God, for it says the Lord looked on Gideon; and in the third, the Angel of Jehovah, a direct representative of God.
I trust all of us have had moments when we have been conscious of the Lord’s presence. We would love to be able to detain the Lord. In assembly, we realise at times the consciousness of the Divine Presence, and long to be able to hold that Presence for a longer period. Such moments are all too brief, whether known individually or collectively. How soon the Lord withdraws because we lack the power to detain Him!
I would say a word from these wonderful scriptures in order to show what these beloved saints had, through which they could hold the Lord for the moment. In the new heavens and the new earth, “the tabernacle of God is with men”; that is not provisional but eternal. We realise but little the supreme blessedness of having God Himself with them, their God. He will dwell with them. It is not then a visit. Eternity is not God visiting, as He does now. “What is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou visitest him?”, @Psalm 8: 4. God is pleased to visit, but the goal is not a visit, but a permanent residence amongst men, of the blessedness of which we have but little conception. My desire is that these visits should be increased with us. The Lord indicated that where conditions permitted. He would manifest Himself to *one* believer. “I will love him, and will manifest
{55}
myself to him ... and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him”, @John 14: 21, 23.
Think of this beloved saint, Abraham, this father of us all! What a magnificent scene it is! He can detain these three heavenly visitors. He recognises them and speaks to one as the Lord. He suggests to them that they sit down under the tree and refresh themselves while he goes away to perform a certain service for them, and they say, “So do, as thou hast said”. Evidently what Abraham proposed was of such value that God was prepared to wait while it was carried out. It says at the end of the chapter, “the Lord went his way”. What a way it is! What things God has on hand! This chapter refers to some matters He had on hand. God’s movements are far greater than we have any conception -- “Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy footsteps are not known”, @Psalm 77: 19. Yet Abraham can detain Him for the moment, and God is willing to be detained. I think it is clear that God is willing to be detained at this point, for the word is, “So do, as thou hast said”, and the Lord and the two angels remain under the tree waiting on the service of Abraham, because there was something that he would do that was acceptable to God. It speaks to us of God’s delight in that which we may bring to Him for His own joy. We need to be transferred from being self-centred to having God as our Centre. Abraham has God as his Centre, and he is urgent in his service God-ward. One confesses how dilatory we often are when it comes to serving God; as if there were no urgency. When Abraham saw these three visitors “He ran to meet them”, the Spirit of God records that. The service he proposed to render while God waited he carried out urgently. He told Sarah to make cakes *quickly*, and he himself *ran* to the herd, and took a calf, tender and good, and a young man *hasted* to dress it. They were detaining God. I am not magnifying the incident, it is there clearly that God and the two angels are being detained under the tree
{56}
waiting for this service, and you can therefore understand Abraham being urgent. Would to God we had an outlook like that in assembly service, and did not act as though it were a matter of no consequence.
What can Abraham bring that is of such value that God waits on Abraham? The Spirit of God opens it up in wonderful detail -- cakes of fine flour, a calf tender and good, and thick and sweet milk. God is willing to wait for such gifts that these things represent. It is a marvellous suggestion that the bringing to God of these cakes, this calf, and this milk, is of such value that God will wait for it, and it says that they ate it while Abraham stood by, watching the delight of his heavenly visitors as they enjoyed what he had brought to them.
What can we bring God that could hold Him for the moment? These things suggest what God would wait to receive; they represent our apprehension of Christ. The cakes of fine flour represent our appreciation of Christ as the second Man out of heaven, a different kind of man from every other. “The first man is of the earth, earthy”, no fine flour, no wheat; “The second man is the Lord from heaven”, @1 Corinthians 15: 47. I believe God delights for us to bring to Him our appreciation of the heavenly Man: The calf speaks of the energy of His devotedness to the will of God, every energy intact, nothing effete. Tender -- what a suggestion in that! -- not affected by the hard labour that sin brought on man; no yoke ever having come on Him: the calf is tender and good. What perfect goodness, what excellence in that blessed One! Abraham brings that to God. The milk thick and sweet is Christ as the expression of the mind of God, the Word. That is the thought of milk in Scripture. Christ is the One Who expresses the wealth and sweetness of the thoughts of God. Abraham brings that. God waits for it and receives it and eats it, speaking reverently, having tarried for it under the tree.
Abraham has his portion out of all this, for you cannot conceive that God does not answer with abundant
{57}
blessing those who minister to Him. “Where is Sarah thy wife?” One result is that he learns of the coming of Isaac, for us it means we learn more of Christ and see Him in a fresh way.
Then God discloses to Abraham what He is doing in relation to this world. “Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do?” God discloses to such what He is doing in relation to the judgment of this world, as well as what He is doing in bringing in Christ. We are tested every Lord’s Day as to what we really have, so that, when the Lord comes in, we can hold Him.
We pass on now to a feebler scene, more in keeping with the day we are in, the end instead of the beginning. Abraham is the father of us all, we are all obligated to Abraham. Judges is a day of great weakness and departure, yet it is remarkable in this book, that so perfectly portrays the departure that now exists amongst God’s people, we find two persons on two different occasions that can detain the Lord. The first is Gideon. The Lord appears to him as he is threshing wheat. He values wheat, like his father Abraham. The Midianites were in power, and they destroyed the produce of the land. They and their camels were like grasshoppers. They represent the activities of contention amongst God’s people. If we open the door to contention, in Ballarat or elsewhere, the wheat, the barley, the olives, the grapes, and the honey will disappear. Contention is a dreadful scourge. Nevertheless, Gideon has some wheat in a very limited sphere, in the wine-press. The Lord appears there to him. I do not touch on what He says to Gideon, but point out that Gideon asks that He would stay there while he gets his present and the Lord agrees to this. It says, “The Lord said”; and later, “The angel of God said”; you can hardly tell whether it is the angel or the Lord that is there. Gideon goes away to get the present, the Lord being willing to wait for it. Clearly it was understood that what Gideon would bring would be worth waiting for. What did he bring? A kid of the goats and unleavened
{58}
cakes. That is what he had. Abraham had much more but Gideon had that. No Midianite had devoured these, he had kept them free from the Midianites. The kid represents some appreciation of the Lord Jesus Christ in His perfect dependence. The kid of the *goats* represents His separate holy pathway. His dependence and separate character were cherished by Gideon in the Midianitish days in which he lived. Then he had unleavened cakes: he had excluded leaven. One dreadful leaven is the leaven of contention; it spreads until it corrupts everything. He brings his kid, the flesh in a basket and the broth in a pot. He has all in vessels, typically in himself: the Christian is the vessel. God values that what we appreciate in Christ should be formed in us. Gideon has his present in the pot and in the basket. It is laid out on the rock, which represents Christ again, the blessed unchangeable One. The angel waits for this present and it goes up to God acceptably. The angel really represents the Lord waiting there until this kid and these unleavened cakes are brought; and they are accepted. There is sufficient in them to hold the Lord for the time being.
The same thought appears in an even worse day, just before Samson was born. The Philistines, who represent the mind of man operating in the things of God, were holding the saints in bondage. The Lord appears first to Manoah’s wife, and afterwards he appears again consequent upon Manoah’s prayer. When it is established that he is the man, Manoah says, “Let us detain thee until we shall have made ready a kid for thee”. And the angel of the Lord said unto Manoah, “Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread: and if thou wilt offer a burnt offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord”, @Judges 13: 16. Nevertheless, he accepts the suggestion that he be detained. We have little conception how much the angels are doing. What service is laid on the angels of God! As ministering servants, how much they have to do. Yet this angel says, “Though thou detain me” -- but he is detained while Manoah brings his present.
{59}
What does he bring? A kid of the goats. What a contrast to the Philistines is the kid of the goats! The Philistine finds a champion in Goliath. See him in his height, his armour, his head, his sword! Put Goliath alongside a kid of the goats! Manoah had a kid of the goats and the angel would wait for it. He also puts it on the rock. What magnificent thoughts of Christ these are! The rock is another view of Christ, not a small view but a great and glorious view. The angel accepts the offering on behalf of God and he goes up in the flame, and they bow down before God.
This thought appears in @Luke 24: 28, “He made as though he would have gone further”. Where was the Lord going? He was going further, He had much more on hand that day. There is hardly a greater day than the one on which the Lord rose from the dead. How much He did on that one day! So He is going further, but nevertheless these two saints can detain the Lord for the moment. It is purely a provisional matter, “Stay with us”. Oh, how the Lord loved to hear that! “Stay with us ... and he entered in to stay with them”, @Luke 24: 29. I have no doubt the Lord delighted in that appeal to Him, for they valued His presence. What did He find when He came in? They were willing to accept His headship without question. He sat at table, took the bread and gave thanks. I doubt if we will ever hold the Lord until we accept His headship. The Lord knew they had reached that point in their souls. He gave thanks: He took the place of Head in that house. If we are not willing for Him to be Head, we cannot detain Him. Another thing that entered into their power to detain Him was their willingness to be adjusted. They were on a path that was not altogether right. However sincere they were, they were going away from the line the Lord was on, the centre of His interests, but He adjusted them. They listened to the Scriptures. He opened to them the Scriptures and they listened. I am sure it would appeal to the Lord that here are two persons who are willing to submit to the Scriptures.
{60}
They did not only accept them mentally, but their hearts were in the matter. “Did not our heart burn within us”, @Luke 24: 32. I believe the Lord does value persons who are willing to let the Scriptures have their living voice to their minds and hearts. Whatever might be said as to their going away from Jerusalem, they have power to detain the Lord. I am not overlooking that they had to go back to Jerusalem, nevertheless there was something about these two that could detain the Lord and hold Him at that moment. “He made as though he would have gone further”. He had much more in mind to do, and many other places to go to, but He is detained by these two persons by their submission to the Scriptures, by their burning hearts, and by their willingness to accept Him as Head.
May these features be with the brethren here, that they might be able to hold the divine presence to some extent, and also may each one of us realise something of this great privilege. If we do not know it individually, I doubt if we can realise it much together. “I ... will manifest myself to him”, is what the Lord says.
{61}
JEHOVAH-JIREH AND OTHER COMPOUND NAMES OF GOD
@Genesis 22: 13, 14; @Exodus 17: 13 - 16; @Judges 6: 22 - 24; @Ezekiel 48: 30 - 35
The thought that unites these passages is the compound name of Jehovah found in each of them. In the first we have Jehovah-jireh; in the second, Jehovah-nissi; in the third, Jehovah-shalom; and in the fourth, “Jehovah is there” or Jehovah Shammah. I would like to speak of these four references to God, for they bring before us ways in which we are to know God, and all blessing lies in the knowledge of God.
As we grow older, we feel the poverty of what largely engages men now. What must be the greatness of that which will occupy eternity! All will then be engaged with God. God will fill eternity. He will be all in all. I think that is one of the most wonderful statements of Scripture, “that God may be all in all”, @1 Corinthians 15: 28. We are often made to feel that God has no place at all with many. It says in Scripture that God is not in all their thoughts. I think that means that such never think about God. But the blessedness of eternity is that God is all; He fills everything, He is all in all. I may say that Christ also is to be everything, for our blessed Lord has gone up “above all the heavens, that he might fill all things”, @Ephesians 4: 10. He has gone beyond all limits. I understand “above all the heavens” to be beyond limits. The heavens are limited even though man cannot find the limit. Christ has gone far above all of them, beyond limitation, that He may fill everything.
I would like to present a few thoughts about God which I trust may magnify God to our hearts; not that God could be greater than He is in Himself, but it does say, “Magnify Jehovah with me”, @Psalm 34: 3. He becomes greater to us. He could never be greater than He is, or less than He is. “I am that I am”, remains. But then,
{62}
God is to be magnified in our apprehension of Him. Following the laying of Isaac on the altar, Abraham sees a ram caught in the thicket by its horns. The ram suggests the devoted energy of Christ. The horns suggest the power of His love, that could hold Him, in view of sacrifice. Abraham names the place Jehovah-jireh, “The Lord will provide”.
The name “Jehovah” is a wonderful name. I think it has been said that it is as near to a personal name of God as we can get. The personal name of our Lord is Jesus; the other names are largely official titles, such as “Christ”, “Son of Man”, and the “Lord”. These bring His official glory before us, but Jesus is not exactly a title, for it is not to bring before us what is official; it is His personal name. I believe the name Jehovah is something like that. It is God known personally in His entering into covenant with man. The name Almighty does not suggest that; it brings before us God’s unlimited power. His name, as “Most High”, brings before us that lie is far above all others; whoever they are. But Jehovah is the name God uses to indicate that He is entering into relationship and covenant with men.
Jehovah-jireh means that that blessed God, who draws near to men in covenant, will provide what is required. In His personal interest and dealings with His people, He will provide what is needed. This is learnt in the place where He is ministered to. We are not entitled to use that name indiscriminately. If we are seeking to minister to the pleasure of God, then we can draw near to God as Jehovah-jireh; we can have access to such an altar as Abraham had erected. I commend this thought, that if we would be in touch with the One who will provide. He is known thus by those who would minister to Him. I would not exclude this from our homes or occupations if so be that His pleasure is really governing us, for He would thus provide whatever is needed in every sphere in which His people move. This is the path of true blessing and true support.
{63}
It is clear that Abraham moved in the line of ministering to the pleasure of God, for God says, “because thou hast done this”. We cannot estimate how God valued Abraham’s action. Abraham was prepared to minister to God of the choicest that he had on earth, and on that basis he names the place Jehovah-jireh, “the Lord will provide”. I hope we all have such an altar. An altar suggests our access to God. God desires that we should draw near to Him. “Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you”, @James 4: 8.
I would pass on to what I specially want to refer to, the next name, Jehovah-nissi, “Jehovah my banner”, and the altar in relation to this name. It is a matter of the very greatest importance if we are to be here for God, that we constantly draw near to God in this light, “Jehovah my banner”. It is a military thought. Jehovah has erected a banner, indeed He is the banner, and under His banner His people gather to wage war against Amalek in every generation. That banner has never ceased to fly. We shall never really have access to Jehovah-jireh if we do not draw near to Jehovah-nissi. I believe the first is really the last as well, as indeed it is always with God, the first and the last are the same, but the process in our souls to reach Jehovah-jireh is by way of Jehovah-nissi. That is to say, we are with God in relation to His war with Amalek. We shall never minister to God until we are found under that banner.
I suppose the conflict with Amalek is the first conflict a Christian has part in, and it never stops while time lasts. If we depart from that banner, we shall certainly miss the blessed privilege of being here for God. What it means is that we are with God in His hostility against the operations of sin in the flesh. God is against that; Satan is for it. The King Agag is a figure of Satan operating through sin in the flesh to displace God. His hand is on the throne of God to displace God’s rule over His people. What a power this is in our earlier days, what a conflict!
Satan would destroy us for the testimony through sin in
{64}
the flesh, but God has erected His banner. Joshua is under that banner; Moses is under that banner; Aaron and Hur are under that banner.
Everyone who is under that banner gets the victory sooner or later. The battle may fluctuate; those of us who are a little older can tell you that it does fluctuate. In our history it has fluctuated like it did with Israel, sometimes up and sometimes down in the results, but the banner is there, “Jehovah my banner”. War throughout all generations is on the banner. Let us never lose sight of it day or night. War throughout all generations is the banner God maintains in respect of sin in the flesh.
How triumphant were God’s people when they were under that banner! In this very passage it says that Joshua smote Amalek with the edge of the sword. Later, the prophet Samuel is under the banner. He sees Jehovah-nissi as he hews Agag the Amalekite in pieces; he does not make quarter with Agag. David too, when he wages war under that banner, is triumphant. Mordecai down in Babylon is nevertheless under that banner. What a glorious victory was his over the Amalekite, even though isolated from Jerusalem!
Think of our brethren in the camps, away from the eyes of their brethren, but if under that banner, they are safe. If their eyes are on Jehovah-nissi, war against Amalek, we have nothing to fear as to them. Depart from this banner as king Saul did when he spared the Amalekite, and disaster follows. “I have rejected him”, the Lord says, “because he gave up Jehovah-nissi”, @1 Samuel 16: 1. David forgot this altar in the matter of Uriah and Bathsheba. He was not under that banner, with what awful results, what defeat, what dishonour! God would help us to know Him as Jehovah-nissi, He Himself being our banner, “the Lord my banner”, in respect of the war against sin in the flesh. I would appeal to the dear young ones never to entertain peace with Amalek. You may have conflict, you will have it; you may have fluctuating experiences, and you will, for we all have; but never allow
{65}
the idea of peace with Amalek. Keep in touch with this altar, however testing it may be, for this is the way to blessing and victory, and it leads to what I began with, “the Lord will provide”.
I pass on to Gideon’s altar. He built an altar and he called it Jehovah-shalom, “Jehovah is peace”. A wonderful altar, and wonderful knowledge of God, “Jehovah is peace”. The opposite to “Jehovah my banner”, for that means God is conducting war, but “Jehovah is peace” is the other side of the truth. There was no peace around Gideon. There were Midianites like grasshoppers in multitudes round him. The Midianite represents contention. Scripture tells us that the Midianites destroyed the produce of the land. When contention comes, the produce of the land disappears. The land is a very good land, a land of wheat and barley. That is to say, in God’s land we feed upon Christ, according to the purpose of God, the wheat; upon Christ in resurrection, the barley. The forty days in which Christ moved amongst His own ere He ascended is the barley. What days they were! Canaan is a land of vines, a land of heavenly joy. The vine represents earthly joys, but the vine of Canaan represents heavenly joys. It is a land of olives, of fatness and spiritual substance. It is a land of figs, sweetness and good fruit. It is a land of pomegranates, of unity amongst God’s people. It is a land of honey, the sweetest thing of all. We know a little of these things. Thank God for the enjoyment of the produce of Canaan. It is a land of milk too, where the mind of God is known and enjoyed, where God’s thoughts are received.
But when the Midianite comes, the produce of the land is destroyed. I speak of this because contention arises at times, and a contentious spirit will destroy the present enjoyment of all these blessed things. Gideon is not contentious; indeed they called him Jerubbaal, saying, “Let Baal plead with (or contend against) him”. Gideon retires rather than contend. The Apostle Paul says of contention, “we have no such custom”. It is not
{66}
a custom of the assemblies of God to have contention. So Gideon is not a contentious man; he is threshing wheat. What is needed is food, not contention. God reveals Himself to Gideon as Jehovah-shalom, “Jehovah is peace”. What a contrast to the contention represented by the Midianites. The thought of God for His own is peace. Gideon erects the altar and calls it this name. Jehovah-shalom.
I would point out how Gideon dealt with the Midianites and overthrew them. He received the thought of “Jehovah is peace” and later he attacks the Midianites. How does he do it? With the most remarkable weapons you could conceive. He takes a trumpet in his right hand and an empty pitcher in his left, and puts a torch in the pitcher and says to his three hundred men. What I do, do likewise. The most effective way of dealing with contention is to be an example. He goes forward as a model, he says, “Look on me, and do likewise”. The trumpet brings God in; it blows an alarm, bringing God into the matter. When there is contention, bring God in. Then get an empty vessel; you cannot contend with an empty vessel. Men are needed who are prepared to be emptied of their own self-importance: such was Gideon. Into that vessel is placed a torch, the light of God’s word. This is what overthrows the Midianites; God turns their swords against one another.
The book of Judges is remarkable as to the kind of instruments that are used. There is an array of weapons in the armoury of God in this book, the like of which you will find nowhere else; weapons which God uses in the last days, for the book of Judges depicts the last days just before the king appears. I do not pursue it, but suggest it for your meditation. One instrument is a two-edged dagger that Ehud made for himself. Other instruments are the tent-pin and the hammer -- the tent-pin that holds down your tent in the inheritance, a fine weapon; and the hammer, the word of God. Another instrument is the ox goad that urges on the ox in its patient labour.
{67}
There are the trumpets, the empty pitchers and the torches, which routed these hosts of the Midianites. There is the upper mill-stone which a woman had, with which she ground corn. Then there is the fresh jaw bone of an ass, with which Samson slew Philistines by the thousand. These are instruments which God uses in the last days. I think all refer to different features of the word of God; whether it be the sword, the hammer, the light, or the ability to masticate food, all refer to the word of God in its living, operative power to deal with enemies that arise.
I trust we may receive an impression as to these three altars. First, “Jehovah will provide”; if we are seeking to minister to Him, Jehovah will provide. The second, “Jehovah my banner”; we are in the war with the flesh and we are not going to make peace as under that banner. Then “Jehovah is peace”; whatever the power of the Midianites around us, Jehovah is peace. He has peace in view for His people. As we face the Midianites, let us have this altar, the light of God as peace.
I refer now to the remarkable word in Ezekiel, “Jehovah is there”. “The name of the city from that day, Jehovah is there.” The great issue is Jehovah is there. As we follow these other names of God, it will bring us to this point -- “Jehovah is there”. The setting of it is that every tribe is in its place, having its part. The feeble sense we often have of Jehovah being there is because so many are not in their places, fulfilling their part. It is when all occupy the places allotted to them and all function, that the presence of God is known. I know we but feebly realise this now, for in any case many are missing, but even so there is available a much greater sense of the divine presence if we are all in our places. It is not a matter only of being physically and literally present when we can be, though that is important, but being there actively in our spirits and affections. The measure in which all are fulfilling their part is the measure in which God’s presence is known. I beg that all of us
{68}
take this up seriously if we want to know this, “the Lord is there”.
We do not occupy the same place; Reuben and Judah and Levi were on quite a different side of the city from three of the others. God allots to all just that place which He knows is best, and it is as we sympathetically and actively occupy it that the presence of God is known. We sometimes touch something of this in assembly when all are more or less truly in the service. It is a wonderful moment when the whole gathering is brought into living touch with God. These are moments when God gives His presence. It says when each of the tribes occupies the place given to it by God, that the name of the city from that day is Jehovah Shammah, “Jehovah is there”. It literally applies to the coming day, but the principle applies even in this city. If twenty saints are together in reality and faith, each contributing the part allotted to him by the Lord, then the Lord is there. It is by our dilatoriness, lack of interest, and lack of devotedness to the Lord that we are deprived of His presence. I do not think fewness of numbers necessarily should deprive the dear brethren here of the sense that the Lord is here if each one would take up in reality his part in the interests of God.
Those are the thoughts which one had in mind, desiring that we might know Jehovah in these ways; as Jehovah-jireh, “the Lord will provide”. Let us draw near to Him in faith; the Lord will provide. On our side it is imperative that the altar Jehovah-nissi should be approached, “the Lord my banner”. We are actively in the conflict against the flesh. Then, “Jehovah is peace”. Instead of contention and lack of supply, Jehovah is peace. He would help us to deal with the elements of contention in our own souls by bringing God in, by having empty vessels with the light of His mind in them. God known thus will lead to each one functioning in his proper place in the assembly, and the effect of this will be, “The name of the city from that day, Jehovah is there”.
{69}
We desire that the dear brethren here may know as never before that the name of the city is “The Lord is there”. May we all know it in greater measure as fulfilling our part in reality, in faith and, devotedness to the Lord, for His Name’s sake.
{70}
STEWARDSHIP
@1 Corinthians 4: 1 - 4; @Genesis 24: 10, 53 - 56; @Luke 16: 1, 2
What I have to say, dear brethren, has in view encouraging each of us to accept the position of stewardship. This means that something is committed to us in trust, which is not our own, though we administer it for the time being. How deeply the apostle Paul was concerned about this matter, as to Timothy, saying to him, “O Timotheus, keep the entrusted deposit”, @1 Timothy 6: 20. He recognised that a deposit had been placed in the trust of Timothy and he appealed with deep affection and feeling that that deposit should be safeguarded by Timothy so that it should be kept.
While one would not exactly speak of our Lord as a “steward” yet the principle of stewardship is clearly seen in Him. I know that in one sense things belong to Christ, for instance the assembly is *His* assembly, it is His property; but, nevertheless, in many ways our Lord accepted in grace this position of trust. This is clear in the way He viewed His precious body. While He does speak of it as “This is my body”; yet how perfectly He held that precious vessel in trust for God. Indeed He came into it in order that in it He might effect the will of God, as it is said “Lo, I come to do thy will, O God”, @Hebrews 10: 9. “Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me”, @Hebrews 10: 5. The Lord ever held that body for the service for which it was prepared. Then the Lord held His time as a trust. One loves to think of Him at twelve years old with such an attitude, “did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father’s business?” @Luke 2: 49. At twelve years of age He accepted the obligation to use His time for the service of God, “my Father’s business”; and that extended to every single day. How it humbles us! There was not
{71}
one day of the life of Jesus here that was not held in trust for God. So that He says “He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed”, @Isaiah 50: 4. The Lord had His ear opened every morning for instructions for the day, His time was held for God as a deposit entrusted.
I thought first of all we might look at this great matter as expressed in Paul. He desired that the Corinthians should think of him as a steward of the mysteries of God. He did not assume that those mysteries were his own property, but that they had been entrusted to him as a steward. Then he adds, “it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful”, @1 Corinthians 4: 2. The great feature necessary in stewardship is faithfulness, because we are handling what is not our own. It is a much more serious matter to be unfaithful in what is not ours than to be careless with what is ours. I think all will see that to be true. The apostle Paul says, “it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful”. What a vista we have thus of the life of Paul, a man to whom God entrusted His mysteries. You will notice these are in the plural. Paul filled in his days carrying the mysteries of God as a steward. What treasures he had in his care. He sought according to the grace of the Lord to him, to be faithful in his stewardship, he would not act in any way inconsistent or unfaithful in what had been entrusted to him.
Let us consider briefly some of these mysteries that Paul held as a steward. First of all, there is what is confessedly great; every Christian acknowledges the greatness and the mystery of piety. “God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit, has appeared to angels, has been preached among the nations, has been believed on in the world, has been received up in glory”, @1 Timothy 3: 16. This is a great mystery; and Paul carried it in integrity desiring to be faithful to it. He was blessed in his faithfulness. He would never lose sight of the meaning of this mystery. He had been initiated into the
{72}
greatest mystery in the universe; that God has been manifest in flesh, justified, not by this world by men, but in the Spirit; the Spirit of God coming on Him without measure is His justification. All the angelic hosts were observant of Him, and, not to touch all the detail, He has been received up in glory. The magnificent reception of Christ in heaven was known to Paul’s heart as part of the mystery of piety. All this would be a governing influence over his life. This mystery was a treasured deposit in his soul and he would keep it, be true to it, and allow nothing in his life inconsistent with it.
There is another mystery of which he was a steward. He says, “This mystery is great, but I speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly”, @Ephesians 5: 32. In the light of the relationship, the union that exists between Christ and the assembly in the figure of a husband and wife, he says, “Husbands, love your own wives”, @Ephesians 5: 25, “This mystery is great, but I speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly”. He faithfully carried that mystery and administered it, having ever before him what Christ is to the assembly, and what the assembly is to Christ.
He was entrusted with another mystery, not known before from the foundation of the world, as stated in Colossians: “Christ in you” -- Christ in the Gentiles -- a magnificent thing, but a mystery, “Christ in you the hope of glory”, @Colossians 1: 27. He served amongst the Gentiles as a faithful steward of this mystery.
He guarded also the mystery of the hidden wisdom, “But we speak God’s wisdom in a mystery, that hidden wisdom which God had pre-determined before the ages for our glory: which none of the princes of this age knew (for had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory)”, @1 Corinthians 2: 7, 8. Paul was a steward of the hidden wisdom, the wisdom of God in a mystery, how God has resources to deal with every situation that ever could arise, and how He does it through the cross; hidden from the eyes of men is this wisdom. It is the wisdom of God in a mystery, but known to Paul, and he
{73}
is steward of it, and faithful in the preaching of it.
Lastly I refer to another: “Behold, I tell you a mystery: We shall not all fall asleep, but we shall all be changed, in an instant, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed”, @1 Corinthians 15: 51, 52. Paul was steward of the mystery of the resurrection, the power of God to raise the saints who have died and to change the living. That mystery also governed his life and service.
What a man Paul was, carrying all these wonderful mysteries and faithfully administering them as a steward, seeking to be in accord with them in his life, his spirit, his outlook, and service. We can understand in the light of this what is meant by: “Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ”, @1 Corinthians 11: 1. How much there is in Paul to follow, and one feature is this matter of faithful stewardship to the divine mysteries that God has initiated us into in His grace.
I thought to say a word about the first steward that is formally mentioned in Scripture, if he be the one. It is not clear that Eliezer and this servant of Abraham’s are identical, but it would seem so. Abraham says that Eliezer of Damascus was the steward of his house. I think his name is wonderfully suggestive; it means “God my helper”. To be stewards we need the help of God. Every day we need to be in accord with this name if we would be stewards. What is clear as to this great steward is that all the goods of his master were under his hand. Abraham was able to leave everything he had in his house to this servant. We find the servant takes ten camels of his master. Note, they are not his camels, he never thought of them as his camels. He took ten camels of his master. He also took golden earrings, golden bracelets and ornaments of silver and gold; he took clothing and other precious things, all the property of his master. What a man he is! Abraham had no uncertainty as to him that he would abuse his trust. Indeed he takes an
{74}
oath from him -- another trust. Then the steward departs, far from the eyes of his master, and what will he do? What tests us is when the eyes of our master are not on us. What are we doing, then, with our trust? What is this servant doing? It is marvellous what God had in men in those days, he will care for the camels, he is concerned that they should have drink and provender because they are his master’s. He has the jewels of silver and gold, but none ever saw them on him; nor did he melt them down. They are his master’s, they are for the bride of Isaac, she is to have them according to the will of his master, they are safe until they are needed. He puts them on Rebecca and also gives precious things to Laban and her mother. It does not say what they were. He had clothing in his trust, too, but he would never be seen in such garments, for he is a steward. He brings them out for the one that Abraham intended to have them. Later they say to him, Well, tarry ten days at least, but he says, “Hinder me not” -- my time is not my own, I am a steward, my time is my master’s, I have to give an account of my stewardship. When he met Isaac he told him everything he had done. How greatly we need to take character from this dear man, so that what has been committed to us is held in integrity, not for our own aggrandisement, not that we should wear ornaments and garments so that we might be conspicuous. That is not a steward’s part; the ornaments and garments represent God’s precious thoughts for His assembly, the assembly of Christ. She is to be clothed and adorned according to His thoughts. I thought we have an example in Eliezer, as it may be, of a true steward as well as one in Paul.
I would refer to another steward. Obadiah, the steward of Ahab. What a difficult position he was in, trusted with service and responsibility by Ahab. What help would be needed to be faithful in such an atmosphere and in such surroundings. Ahab was the wickedest king Israel had and behind him was Jezebel urging him on.
{75}
To be a steward in such an atmosphere needs the help of God. How those serving in the forces need the help of God to be faithful to what is entrusted to them however dreadful may be the influences around them. That Obadiah was preserved is clear, for we find him available for the support of the prophetic word. He hides and feeds two companies of prophets by fifties in a cave. He is available in such conditions for the maintenance of the prophetic word. We pray that this might be true of those who are moving in such dreadful atmospheres, that as maintaining integrity and faithfulness to those they serve, and thus indeed to God, they may be able to provide for the continuance of the prophetic word in these days.
I would say a few words as to what is entrusted to us, having in mind the Lord’s word in @Luke 16 as to a certain steward who was accused of wasting his master’s goods, because of which he was dismissed from the stewardship. What has our Master put into our hands? One thing we all are entrusted with at this moment, our bodies. You say, they are our own. No, not now. The Christian’s body belongs to God and to the Lord. It has been bought, so that the apostle says, “The body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body”, @1 Corinthians 6: 13, so that from this angle the believer’s body is a trust. The Lord is looking to us to be faithful, as to this trust, “it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful”. Our bodies are part of the deposit entrusted. The Lord would help us to keep this in mind, for with the increasing tide of corruption and immorality, days such as marked Sodom are approaching. Let us not deceive ourselves. This world is fast becoming a Sodom. You will pardon me if I speak plainly as to this fact, but the threat is more serious than many conceive. Let us be as Eliezer and seek to be faithful to the trust, holding our bodies not for fornication or lasciviousness, but for the Lord on trust. The sisters would be helped by remembering this, so that they do not disfigure their bodies by conforming to those modern customs that are so dishonouring
{76}
to God as Creator. The apostle says, “Do ye not know that your body is temple of the Holy Spirit?”, @1 Corinthians 6: 19. Our bodies are the Lord’s, allowed to us to retain for a little on trust, and in addition they are shrines of the Holy Spirit. I believe if we were to keep this before us more, it would help us to be more faithful in the use of our bodies.
I refer now to the mind of the believer, as also part of what is to be held on trust. In the seventh of Revelation an angel appears with “the seal of the living God”, to impress that seal on the foreheads of His bondmen. The winds that are about to blow are held till this is done. I trust the Lord will help us to see what this means. The thought of a seal is the mark of ownership. The Holy Spirit is given to the believer as the seal of divine ownership. The living God has His seal and He would have that seal placed on the foreheads of His own. The locusts that come out of the smoke of the pit only torment those “who have not the seal of God on their foreheads”, @Revelation 9: 3, 4. Are we prepared to entertain that our minds are the property of God? The man of the world will have no such thing; he will think what he likes. Liberty for man’s mind and tongue is claimed in this world. But what a deception is this liberty, for it will end in the false prophet imprinting on such foreheads the mark of the ownership of the beast. Behind the beast is the dragon who is called Devil and Satan. A great part of the conflict between good and evil in the last days relates to who is to possess the mind of man. Our protection from the dreadful influences from the pit is for us to recognise that our minds are the property of God and to allow the seal of the living God to be placed on our foreheads, so that our minds are regulated and recognised to be the property of God on trust to be used for Him.
Much else is given to us on trust, if we understood things rightly. The material things that we have are not really ours. The Lord will give us what is our own. He indicates this in the Scripture: “If ye have not been faithful
{77}
in that which is another’s, who shall give to you your own?” -- @Luke 16: 12. The reference to “another’s” is to mammon, material things. Are we prepared to consider that the money and earthly things we have are not ours in an absolute sense, they are on trust to be used for the Master, and it is required in stewards that such be found faithful? What shall we feel if the Lord has to say that we have wasted His goods? The steward in @Luke 16 is accused of having wasted his master’s goods. Wasted his body, wasted his time, our time is not really ours. Peter says, “No longer to five the rest of his time in the flesh to men’s lusts, but to God’s will”, @1 Peter 4: 2. We have wasted enough time, have we not? -- but the rest of our time is a trust committed to us to be faithful with. The one accused of wasting his goods is told, “Thou mayest be no longer steward”. If we continue wasting our Master’s goods the Master will dismiss us. How blessed indeed to remain in His service. We need the help of God for that, “Eliezer”.
This feature is manifest in the great men of God. Take Joseph -- what a steward he was! Potiphar put everything into his hands and did not take account of anything except what he ate, all else he left to Joseph. How true Joseph was to his trust. When he was in prison the same thing happened; the keeper of the prison put everything into the hands of Joseph. When he came to be next to Pharaoh on the throne everything was entrusted to him. It says Joseph “was a prosperous man”. The way to true prosperity is faithfulness to trust, seen outstandingly in Joseph, seen outstandingly, too, in Daniel, who, it says, “prospered”. Both Joseph and Daniel prospered in adverse conditions. The presidents said of Daniel that no fault could be found in his stewardship. They looked into his life, his behaviour, his work, his accounts, and said, “We shall not find any pretext against this Daniel, unless we find it against him touching the law of his God”, and it says, “this Daniel prospered”. The secret of the great prosperity of certain of God’s servants right down
{78}
the ages is integrity to trust. I commend to the young ones, to us all, and specially to the dear brethren who are in the camps, the thought of *integrity to trust*. Daniel “kneeled on his knees three times a day and prayed” for the help of God, and one desires that we may approach this subject every day with the prayer that God would help us to be faithful as stewards, as to our bodies, our minds, our time, our earthly things and, above all, as to the mysteries of God with which in some little measure we have been entrusted. What a deposit! In Paul’s mind all this was present and more, when he said, “O Timotheus, keep the entrusted deposit”. The Lord help us to do so.
{79}
FOOD - CLEAN AND UNCLEAN
@Deuteronomy 14: 3 - 21
W.J.H. God desires His people to reach maturity; it says, “Till we all come ... unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ”, and “May grow up into him in all things”, @Ephesians 4: 13, 15. The expression “all things” is important for us to recognise, for not one thing that is not in keeping with Him is to be allowed to remain unjudged.
We may be helped to look at the food we may eat in view of growth, that being largely dependent on food. One had in mind the great range of food available in God’s land. In Egypt the variety of food for the people of God is very restricted, in general it may be said to be confined to the passover lamb, the unleavened bread, and bitter herbs. In the wilderness the variety of food is also limited and, in the main, is confined to manna, but in God’s land there is a range of food available to the saints, so that they may reach maturity. We cannot look much at this range now, but if we look a little at what is in our chapter, the Lord might stimulate our desires and give us a sense of what is available. There is no shortage of the many kinds of food available in God’s land.
J.W. Is what you have said enriched by the first verse, “Ye are sons of Jehovah your God”?
W.J.H. That bears on what has been said. God’s people were His sons, which involves maturity, not only are they His children; they are His sons, and as such they are to eat food in keeping with such dignified and mature relationship. It says in Joshua that, having crossed the Jordan, they ate that year of the produce of the land. What a thought that is: what that land produces! It includes wheat and barley, the vine, and the fig and the
{80}
olive, the pomegranate, honey and milk, in addition to those there is animal food available through death. The thought of death does not enter so much, if at all, into the other foods, but the clean animals that we may eat are available only through death.
G.H.McK. It would remind us that our life is sustained by that which required the death of another.
W.J.H. I think the matter of not eating a carcase is of the greatest importance. A carcase refers to what dies of itself and is therefore not good food. Only what is made available through the beast being slain is good food. The carcase may be sold to the stranger, but the people of God are not to eat it.
F.W.U. Is there any thought of dying of itself being connected with corruption?
W.J.H. That would follow rapidly, but I think dying of itself would involve that there is no application of the Spirit of God in the matter. “If, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body”, @Romans 8: 13. There are things that may die out in people’s lives and in the world, of themselves; things that just work themselves out and disappear. Such are not food for a Christian. Take the temperance movement as an example. It is all right for the stranger, but we are not to find food in such movements. There is no application of the meaning of the death of Christ in it. It is right enough for the world, but it is not suitable for the Christian; we must get our food by the direct application of death.
We might dwell together on what we may eat so that all should have a sense of the great range of food available, and feed upon it.
J.H. Would the food spoken of in @John 6 be food to bring about maturity?
W.J.H. Yes. It would maintain life, “He also who eats me shall live also on account of me”, @John 6: 57. The Lord’s supper too, is very good food, of the best but, while the Lord’s supper is available weekly, I suppose
{81}
we may have the food spoken of in this chapter just as often as we have appetite.
E.A.K. Does the range of food you have referred to and its excellent quality, come out in the one day provision of Solomon’s table, where some of the food that is before us in this scripture is enumerated?
W.J.H. That is helpful. I think it gives a list of what was provided each day, and when the queen of Sheba came to Solomon and saw “the food of his table” in such great variety, “ ... there was no more spirit in her”. Men and women of this world are turning to the sink of corruption for food today, and often doing what they did in the siege of Samaria figuratively, eating asses¬ heads and doves¬ dung, and paying a fabulous price for such unclean food. The Lord would help us to appreciate the variety and excellence of what is available in God’s land.
The first referred to are “the ox, the sheep, and the goat”. These are in one class by themselves; each of these represent excellent food. The ox in Scripture is connected with untiring service to others, a feature seen so perfectly in Christ. He took indeed “a bondman’s form”, which is service in the extreme, and said to His own “I am in the midst of you as the one that serves”, @Luke 22: 27. What excellent food, and the more we eat it the more we will be ready to consistently, patiently, and laboriously if needs be, serve the precious interests of Christ and one another.
G.H.McK. “The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister”, @Matthew 20: 28.
W.J.H. Quite so. The Lord came to minister, a wonderful word, and I believe that thought is represented by the ox, and is available for us as food.
V.D. In @Mark 1: 32, “And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that were diseased ... “ That would show an untiring service.
W.J.H. Quite so. When the sun was set an ordinary
{82}
servant might have said it is time to stop, but the ox character goes on.
Ques. What form does this eating take? Is it in the contemplation of Christ?
W.J.H. In a spiritual sense we eat with our minds, and with our affections. Scripture speaks of food for the mind, “the pure mental milk of the word”, @1 Peter 2: 2, showing that the mind is fed. “Bread which strengtheneth man’s heart”, @Psalm 104: 15, shows that the affections are fed. I believe the Lord would help us to think of this feature of the ox, and allow it to feed our affections.
W.A.P. Is patience a feature seen in the ox?
W.J.H. Yes. I have no doubt the ox represents patient service, year in and year out.
C.G. “The Lord direct your hearts ... into the patience of the Christ”, @2 Thessalonians 3: 5. Is that your thought?
W.J.H. That is right. The patience of the Lord, in continuing to serve under all conditions, is food, and the Lord would help us to eat it, so that we take character from what we eat. I am quite sure we all express by our ways, spirits, deportment, and manner of life, the kind of food we eat. It is so physically, but more so spiritually.
E.A.K. Would Jeremiah help us as to the matter of the mind and the affections in eating? He said, “Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart”, @Jeremiah 15: 16.
W.J.H. Quite so. These two faculties are in operation to rightly eat. The thought comes into our minds and we think about it. The apostle says, “Think on these things”, @Philippians 4: 8. I think the Lord wants us to take greater care of our minds. Our poverty largely lies in our minds not being taken up with what is of God but, having thought about these things, food is intended to strengthen the affections for Christ.
{83}
G.F. Why do you confine this food to Canaan?
W.J.H. Deuteronomy contains instructions for the land. What Moses says in this book largely has in view what they would enjoy in the land. The bread for their daily life in the wilderness was the manna; the precious grace of Christ that came here in humble conditions to do the will of God, but the building up of a constitution in view of maturity has in mind this range of spiritual food.
Another animal of this group is the sheep. The sheep represents the submissiveness and readiness to suffer seen perfectly in Christ. Paul says “We are accounted as sheep for the slaughter”, @Romans 8: 36.
G.H.McK. @Isaiah 53: 7, “He was led as a lamb to the slaughter”.
W.J.H. Quite so, “as a sheep dumb before her shearers”. What excellent food to build up what is of God are the features of Christ represented in the sheep.
G.H.McK. Do you think the many of our younger brethren especially called on to suffer find that food supports them in it?
W.J.H. I think so. Think of being shorn! “As a sheep dumb before her shearers”. Naturally we resent this; our spirits get on fire if we are shorn of anything, but the sheep stands before her shearers dumb.
J.H. That came out in a marked way when the Lord Jesus was accused.
W.J.H. Perfectly; and later in Paul in a wonderful way, as a man who fed on this food.
C.G. This food being the food for the land, where and how practically do we appropriate it? Is it in a sphere outside the wilderness setting that we appropriate Christ, and thus are formed in our minds and hearts?
W.J.H. I think the people of God may be looked at as in three positions. In a certain sense they are in the world, and there they need constantly unleavened
{84}
bread, constant refusal of evil in the light of the death of Christ. Then they are also passing through the wilderness on the way to God’s purpose, and in that wilderness need the manna to keep them white and even and strong to do God’s will. But in another sense they may touch the great thoughts of God which will be entered into in their fulness in eternity, and in that connection they need the food that is found in the land.
J.W. Would you agree with what was said long ago that as to our bodies we are in Egypt, as to our experience in the wilderness, but in our spirits we may be in the land?
W.J.H. I think that is right. We may know in our spirits the blessedness of God’s land and enjoy now the food that is there.
J.W. Do you think it would be illustrated in Caleb and Joshua having gone that wonderful excursion into the land and bringing back the fruits of it? While their daily experiences would be of a wilderness character yet in the spirit of their mind they would be enjoying the rich fruits of that land?
W.J.H. Quite so. The Spirit of God, having been given as “earnest of our inheritance”, gives us power to enjoy what is the purpose of God for His own.
F.W.U. Do you suggest, in this threefold character, that the first two are on the line of what is preservative, the unleavened bread and manna, while the third is positive development?
W.J.H. The first is specially preservative, the manna builds up a constitution that will do God’s will, “Man did eat angels¬ food”, @Psalm 78: 25. But the various foods available in Canaan bring before us excellent features of Christ; the ox is one, the sheep is another, and the goat another. The goat, no doubt, speaks especially of the marvellous dignity of the walk of Christ; His holy and separate walk. What food they provide!
J.N.G. Do you connect each of these features specially
{85}
with the way the Lord faced death?
W.J.H. The Lord’s death brings them into perfect expression; His untiring service, His absolute submissiveness, and the stateliness of His going.
V.T.S. Is it interesting that these three mentioned are specially used for the sacrifices?
W.J.H. Showing what delight God has in them. These are brought to God, the sheep and the goat and the bullock, a different thought in the last from the ox, but the same creature.
G.H.McK. Would you enlarge on the thought of dignity connected with the goat?
W.J.H. “There are three things which have a stately step”, @Proverbs 30: 29, and one is “the he-goat”; the tread of kingly dignity that marked Jesus here, separate from all else, but walking in dignity.
E.A.K. Would Joseph bring out the features of the goat, in the dignity that marked him in nearly every situation, as typical of Christ; also in the blessing of Jacob his father “on the crown of the head of him that was separated from his brethren”?
W.J.H. I think that is right. No doubt the goat would bring in the thought of separateness, but also a dignified tread.
G.F. When you spoke of these animals being available only by death, did you mean that, not only must Christ die, but all must pass through death to enjoy them?
W.J.H. I was thinking that the element of sacrifice is required for us to appropriate them, sacrifice as to ourselves. We do not take on these features easily, it requires the element of sacrifice in us. Food is not to be just a carcase. That is the way I was viewing sacrifice at the moment. We know very well it is not natural to us to say “ourselves your servants for Jesus¬ sake”, @2 Corinthians 4: 5. It is not natural for us to be submissive and to tread a dignified walk in separation from all that is
{86}
unsuitable to God.
J.W. Of the animals ending with “the wild sheep” it says, “These are the beasts which ye shall eat”, and then, “every beast that hath cloven hoofs”, and so on, “ye shall eat”, but later there is the thought of discrimination being necessary.
W.J.H. The Spirit of God does not necessarily give the name of every creature, but just general instruction that such must have divided hoofs; there must be a discriminating walk. Then clean animals are those that chew the cud; there must be the feature of rumination marking them.
Before we proceed, there is another group, “the hart, and the gazelle, and the stag, and the wild goat, ... and the wild sheep”, which are not domesticated or under control, they are creatures that are free in the mountains, in the valleys, and in the fields; they go where they will, whereas the ox is yoked in service to men, the sheep and the goats are in flocks under man’s control. These animals are clean and they can be eaten, even the wild sheep and the wild goat. The Lord Jesus alone on the mountain top is as pure and holy as when serving with His own.
Ques. Why do you think there are three and then seven? I was wondering if the three first suggest definitely the Lord Himself.
W.J.H. The Lord has also features of the seven, I think the reference to the sheep as *wild* is in the sense, of not being controlled by men. It is not the wildness of the ass; we cannot eat a wild ass, but you can eat a wild sheep or a wild goat. They live away from human control but they are still sheep and still goats.
E.A.K. Are there not features of beauty and attractiveness in these animals: the stateliness of the stag being outstanding, and the gentleness and grace of the gazelle.
W.J.H. Holy liberty may be suggested in all of them. “I charge you ... the gazelles, or by the hinds of
{87}
the field”, @Song of Songs 2: 7. Liberty of movement in elevated laces is something to feed on.
G.F. Would you suggest anything in Christ that answers to these animals?
W.J.H. I think this thought of agility as being able to move in difficult places with such sure-footedness would be a feature of Christ. The hart is spoken of as panting after the water-brooks, what a feature that is!
G.H.McK. He went as He was wont to the mount of Olives, away from the conventions of men.
W.J.H. Quite so. These creatures are found outside the haunts of men but nevertheless are pure and available as food. We can think of the Lord in that way as often alone, but inherently pure, and we need to feed on that, so that when we are alone we are still marked by purity. The Lord was with His own in the features of the ox and the sheep and the goat, then He retired to the mountains and what agility marked Him moving from height to height; what good food is thus afforded us!
Rem. He could say, “Come with me, from Lebanon”, @Song of Songs 4: 8.
W.J.H. “I will get me to the mountain of myrrh and to the hill of frankincense”, @Song of Songs 4: 6, what liberty of movement in the upper regions. The Song of Songs no doubt, would give us many a clue as to the gazelle, the hind, and the roe.
A.B.J. The disciples accompanied the Lord and were used to His coming in and going out, but there were occasions when none could follow Him. He went out alone and spent the night with God in prayer.
W.J.H. The contemplation of His movements affords food for our minds and our affections and would help us to take character from Him. We are often tested after the supper as to what agility we have to get to the mountains, and it really depends on how far we have been feeding on Christ in this setting.
{88}
E.A.K. The Lord spent whole nights in prayer and rose a great while before day. How much we have had of late in connection with getting up a little earlier to make room for these exercises, feeding on this food would help us.
W.J.H. I am sure it would. It was His custom to retire to the mount of Olives. I wish it were more a custom with us to retire to the spiritual realm. We need food for that.
C.G. Does John describe a man thus formed, as he says, “I became in the Spirit on the Lord’s day”, @Revelation 1: 10, a man formed by this particular kind of food?
W.J.H. Very good. Then it says, “Come up here”, @Revelation 4: 4, he could have access to heaven. He is called up through the door that is opened in heaven.
F.W.U. Do you suggest, from the Song of Songs, that the Lord would move first as giving us an example, “Behold, he cometh leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills”, @Song of Songs 2: 8, and that would produce similar movement with us?
W.J.H. At the Lord’s supper we need to wait in the first instance until the Lord’s voice is heard, and then to be agile when He is moving upward. Sometimes we are rapid at the beginning and very slow when we should be agile. “I charge you ... that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please”, @Song of Songs 3: 5. Everything is passive until He is pleased to wake love. At the beginning of the meeting we come together and sit down quietly and let the Lord wake love, and nobody should stir until He does. But later He would move to the mountains and He wants His own with Him, and therefore we need the agility of the roe, the gazelle, the hind, and those other creatures that live in the mountains.
C.G. These animals suggest great spiritual agility and spiritual sensitivity in relation to the service of God.
{89}
W.J.H. That is it. I think the Lord is helping us as to the bearing of these things. We are to take account of these holy features and delight in them in Christ and allow them to operate in our souls.
G.H.McK. Sensitivity is a very apt word: these animals are extremely sensitive.
W.J.H. In a remarkable way, and they enter much into the Lord’s description of His bride in the Song of Songs.
Perhaps we could refer briefly to the other species, namely what is in the waters, and the birds. There is a great range of food in the waters. There were waters in Canaan and there were fishermen there, and there will be in the world to come. There will be fishing along the banks of the river. So that there are great supplies of food in the waters, but we are to know what kind to eat. The kind that have fins and scales are to be eaten, all others to be rejected. There is great instruction in that: only those who have power to go against the general current and to shut out the element they are in, are clean. We see that perfectly in the Lord. He went exactly in the opposite direction to what was general around, and not one trace of the elements penetrated His moral being. We are to feed on that.
G.D. Does it help that the fish lives in an element that would be death to everything else?
W.J.H. It is an element proper to the fish, but the scales shut out what they are in, so that they are not destroyed by it, and the fins provide them with propulsion against the current. We need these features and are formed according to them by feeding on this food. It is significant that the Lord fed people with fish over and over again. He ate fish after His resurrection, “they gave him part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb”, @Luke 24: 42, showing that fish is good food, but fish with these features.
Then in connection with the birds, all clean birds
{90}
can be eaten, however small, as sparrows, leaving us to find out in detail what are clean. There are certain that we must not eat, namely the birds that feed on carrion, birds of prey, and those that operate at night, the owl and the bat and their kind. We are not to eat the male or female ostrich. It is remarkable the Spirit of God should refer to both thus.
G.H.McK. Would Job help us there?
W.J.H. Yes. I think Scripture explains Scripture. We do not need to go outside of Scripture to understand Scripture. The ostrich has no intelligence and no maternal instincts, but the male specially makes a great show. Job speaking of its feathers, @Job 39: 13. What makes a great show but lacks intelligence and also lacks maternal features is unclean. What operates in the darkness, especially in relation to spiritual influences, is unclean; anything that feeds on what is dead is unclean. Christian science and spiritualism are in this category. Christian science also makes a show like the ostrich, but the system is devoid of spiritual intelligence and without maternal feelings.
L.G.L. Would what is suggested in the ostrich and the owl be indicated in regard to the end of Babylon as, suggested in Isaiah? It speaks about its glory and so on, and what will find a habitation there. These birds are found there.
W.J.H. Indeed the spiritual Babylon is “a hold of every unclean and hated bird”, @Revelation 18: 2. There are many clean birds that we may eat, the dove and the pigeon, and even the sparrow is clean. I do not know any bird that seems so clean as a seagull as to its outward appearance, but it is not clean by reason of what it eats, showing the importance of care and discrimination as to our food.
J.N.G. You alluded to spiritualism; would you connect it with feeding on carrion?
W.J.H. All these wicked systems ignore the ruin of man, and feed on what man is, instead of seeing that
{91}
what man is morally has been judged. Practically everything that is false disowns, in some way or other, the fall and ruin of man, hence they feed on what is morally dead.
E.A.K. Are not the birds that Abram scared away of that character, and do they not speak to us of the adverse spiritual influences that will rob us of impressions of Christ unless we are energetic in that way?
W.J.H. A very good passage to show how urgent the matter is. “Abram scared them away”, @Genesis 15: 12. He would not tolerate their influences in relation to that which spoke of Christ.
{92}
“THE WEAPONS OF OUR WARFARE ARE NOT CARNAL”
@Judges 3: 12 - 23; @Judges 4: 21 - 24; @Judges 7: 15 - 22
W.J.H. The remarkable variety and character of weapons God was pleased to use, as recorded in the book of Judges, affords us great instruction as to how we may meet the activities of various forms of evil that arise when the authority of Christ is not sufficiently recognised. What is indicated in this book is that “there was no king in Israel; every man did what was right in his own eyes”. That condition made way for the activities of various enemies. One has been impressed a little with the weapons that God was pleased to use to defeat them, and that is in mind in suggesting these scriptures.
In the first, we have Moab active bringing great pressure and great distress upon the people of God, and God uses Ehud, a left-handed man, who made himself a two-edged sword which he carried on his right thigh under his raiment, as the instrument through which the king of Moab was overthrown.
In the second passage, the Canaanite greatly distressed Israel, indeed God sold them into their hands -- a remarkable expression -- and the instruments used against Sisera are a tent-pin and a hammer. God used a left-handed man in the first and a woman in the second case.
In the third scripture, the Midianite long vexed Israel. Gideon is used in this case, a man with a definite sense of his own weakness and a timid man; and the weapons that overthrew Midian were 300 trumpets and empty pitchers with a torch in each pitcher. The power of Midian was broken by the use of these unusual weapons.
Later, when the Philistine was in power, God used Samson, and the weapon was a fresh jawbone of an ass, with which a thousand Philistines were slain.
These are the thoughts in mind, as perhaps affording
{93}
an indication to us, at this juncture in this city, how the Lord would deliver us from Moab, who is active now; from the Canaanite, who is also active and from Midian, who is especially active at this time. The Lord would help us to understand what these weapons represent and have us use them; so will these evil influences be overthrown.
E.E. All these weapons you have drawn our attention to are, in themselves, insignificant and very unpretentious, so there must be something morally great about them, to be used thus.
W.J.H. It is remarkable that the Spirit of God should tell us all this detail as to the weapons used. God has chosen the “things which are not, to bring to nought things that are”. He chooses to use what is seemingly of little value and insignificant to bring the enemy down.
E.E. It might be helpful if you just mentioned briefly what these various enemies represent to us -- the Moabite, the Canaanite and the Midianite.
W.J.H. The Moabite, I believe, represents the activities of natural relationships intruding themselves into the things of God -- going outside the sphere that God has given to them, for God gave certain territory to Moab and Ammon as children of Lot, but they sometimes go out of that and intrude themselves on the territory of Israel, the people of God. That is one great danger and difficulty and we need to learn how to deal with it.
The Canaanite stands in Scripture for a merchant, a particularly dangerous foe; to us it may mean we use spiritual things to get a reputation, or to get a place. God will have such dealt with.
The Midianite is the man of “contention”, which his name means. He often joins with Moab in the activities of contention amongst God’s people. We need to learn how he is to be dealt with.
The Philistine is the natural mind working on the
{94}
things of God, instead of learning things in the power of the Holy Spirit, another very great power that rises up in days of weakness. The Philistine has been troubling us in this country for years, especially in some cities. I had not that in mind especially, but feel we are at this moment in this city confronted with Moabite, Canaanite and Midianite influences, and trust the Lord will help us all to secure instruments that will effectively deal with them.
H.S.H. Paul says, “the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God”, @2 Corinthians 10: 4.
W.J.H. That is very helpful. This sword that Ehud had he made for himself, mark that, he had made it for himself, and he saw there were two edges on it. It is the word of God, “mighty through God”. The tent-pin and the hammer are not carnal weapons, they are “mighty through God”; the trumpet and the empty pitcher with the torch are not carnal weapons, but “mighty through God”.
B.O.L. In every instance they considered for God and what was due to Him.
W.J.H. Quite so. Each of the leaders used were thinking of God and His people, and His rights among His people.
R.S. Do you think one of the evidences of having the Holy Spirit is that we are able to discern and judge the movements of these principles in ourselves?
W.J.H. I do not think any of us would ever judge anything in ourselves but for the presence of the Holy Spirit. He is the power that maintains self-judgment.
L.F. Have you something special in mind in saying that Ehud made the sword for himself?
W.J.H. I think the Spirit of God would indicate that having two edges, and having made it, he had first of all in mind to apply it to himself before he applied it to Eglon. He has “a word from God” to Eglon. He
{95}
is going to deal with the corrupting influence of natural relationships intruding themselves into the things of God. He will deal with this mercilessly, but before he uses the sword upon Eglon, he is accustomed to the sword himself, affecting his own inward parts. He has it under his raiment on his right thigh. In principle, it operates on himself first.
K.F. What is the significance of Ehud being left-handed?
W.J.H. I think it would show that God uses what is feeble. A left-handed man is a feeble man, his right hand is bound. Nevertheless he has learned to use this sword and to use it effectively.
A.C. Would you say he held things in an awkward way?
W.J.H. Quite so. We all have to admit that many a thing is done awkwardly, but this sword is effective nevertheless, it is the word of God. The sword that God uses is His word, and we have to learn to let this sword operate under our raiment at the place of our own natural strength, so that we do not intrude natural relationships into the circle of God’s people. This is arising in this city, and I beg us all to face it. When a difficulty arises, natural relationships often rally round the person or persons involved; that is Moab, and has to be dealt with by each one of us by “the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God”.
E.E.S.L. Speaking of natural relationships, have you in mind something wider than mere natural relationships?
W.J.H. It may include the relationship of master and servant. The children of Lot were bound to the children of Israel by natural ties, and God had given them certain territory. Israel was to hold the plains of Moab for God. In the plains of Moab we hold the relationships of husband and wife, parents and children, master and servant, for God. These relationships are not to be
{96}
intruded into the spiritual realm when spiritual conflict arises.
B.W. It was when they cried to Jehovah that He raised them up a saviour. Is that on the line of what you are indicating to us as feeling these things we cry to Jehovah and He will deliver us?
W.J.H. Yes.
D.J.M. Does Levi hold natural relationships in their right place?
W.J.H. Yes. I do not think Levi was without natural affections, but when it is a question of what is due to God, he is not governed by his father, or his mother or his brethren; he is governed by the word of God; he has this sword. We ought to face this matter uprightly, or the enemy will get in. We must let the truth of the word of God govern us and not what is natural, or we shall be overthrown and lose our enjoyment of what God has recovered.
A.E. @Isaiah 16: 6 says Moab “is very proud”. Would this come into it?
W.J.H. Eglon is a very fat man, showing that the Moabite is marked by human greatness, which need to be dealt with.
G.T. In view of the pride of Moab we should become left-handed in order to meet it, having no confidence in the flesh.
W.J.H. Very good.
B.O.L. What do we learn from the fact that he gathered the children of Ammon and Amalek to help in this matter?
W.J.H. Ammon and Moab were both the children of Lot. Other relatives become active at such a time and the flesh is not far away then. Amalek can use Moab and Ammon very effectively and join with them.
G.C.S. One has often wondered why Ehud had his sword on the right thigh.
{97}
W.J.H. The right side refers to the place of power and strength. He could not use his right hand; he was tied as to that, but there was his right thigh and he had the sword there, and it is under his raiment; that is to say in secret dealings with God he is judging himself in these matters before he deals with Eglon.
L.F. You mentioned being before God, that that is the right place to come to to get this judgment on the matter of Moab.
W.J.H. He receives a word from God on the matter. The sword is the word of God. God’s mind as to Moab is that it should have its own territory and not go outside it and intrude in spiritual things.
E.E. “The word of God is ... sharper than any two-edged sword”, dividing what is natural and spiritual. The Lord in His sovereignty may have made one a little successful in service, but that is not a guard against natural feelings.
W.J.H. We are not speaking at persons, for even Barnabas, “a good man and full of the Holy Ghost”, was influenced by Mark, who was “sister’s son to Barnabas”. He was diverted from the spiritual conflict, and the testimony, through allowing Mark an undue place instead of the truth. Let us not think we are better than Barnabas.
L.F. Does this exercise have a peculiar bearing on our outlook in regard to the assembly here, as set over against what is natural? One had in mind the suggestion in the scripture as to “the Benjaminite”, the thought being carried on in Scripture and fulfilled in Paul, through whom we have the truth of the assembly.
W.J.H. Quite so. Paul was a true Benjaminite in that way. He carried the sword under his raiment on his right side and used it when necessary, but on himself first. We need to see that we are all walking in the light of the word of God in this matter.
D.J.M. Would you say Joab had not kept the sword
{98}
under his garment, he let it fall out, with the sad result Amasa was slain?
W.J.H. Quite so. If you do not keep it under your raiment, you may use it on one of God’s servants.
J.S. Eglon king of Moab is strengthened against Israel.
W.J.H. That is governmental. If we do not judge these principles, God allows us to feel their power till we cry to Him.
J.S. One of the features of Moab is that he has been at ease. God would use this occasion to make us rise up and deal with them.
W.J.H. I am sure He would.
S.G. This is not just a matter of a moment. It goes back for a long period.
W.J.H. Moab has a very long history, right back into the book of Genesis. We are told how he came into existence.
H.S.H. I notice that after this conflict there is the longest period of rest that the book of Judges gives -- 80 years the land has rest -- whereas in the next two cases it is 40 years.
W.J.H. Showing what a great result there is when we rise above what is natural dominating us in relation to what is for God.
Perhaps we should move on now and look at this tent-pin and the hammer of Jael which she uses with great skill and power.
The Canaanite is the merchantman. God says, “there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts”. In the book of Zechariah He deals with this trading in the things of God. In times of weakness, and difficulty this power appears and it is a great power, for there is a king, and there are captains and chariots, but the point before us is what God uses to break Sisera’s power. That would teach us what He will use now.
{99}
E.E.S.L. You do not mean an ordinary weapon of war?
W.J.H. Surely not, but one “mighty through God”. Jael is in touch with God. She is a stranger, but she has a tent in Israel, and she has a pin to her tent. She does not intend to be dislodged from her part in the territory, though she has only recently come. That is what the pin represents, her great valuation of her place in Israel.
E.E. As the narrative indicates, there had been a successful conflict beforehand. Would that have a bearing on our exercise in applying this tent-pin?
W.J.H. I thought the conflict preceding it reached a crown in this matter. It is interesting to see that in what went before, God used Deborah, another woman, representing what is weak and outwardly insignificant. Deborah directed Barak in the name of the Lord. This all shows that we are in days of great weakness, which we must humbly own indeed, but nevertheless if we value our tent, and the pin that holds our tent in its place, God will use that to bring the merchantman down.
C.B.M. Could you tell us how we can traffic with the word of God? Paul repudiated that. He did not traffic in the word of God.
W.J.H. “We do not, as the many, make a trade of the word of God”, @2 Corinthians 2: 17. He had no thought of using his service, or his place amongst the saints, to accredit himself -- indeed, he says in @2 Corinthians 13: 7, that as long as they did what was right, he would be content to be regarded as reprobate. Here is a man who has complete power over the Canaanite.
L.F. Is that a development of the first matter? Does that make way for dealing with this matter, too?
W.J.H. I think it is another phase of conflict that comes up in days of weakness -- people thinking of their reputations. What is it that hinders many from saying
{100}
frankly that they are wrong? There are those who do not enjoy the privileges they once had part in for months and years. Why do they not say they are wrong? Is it their reputation that they are not prepared to let go? They lose their tent in Israel because of it. I would urge such to value their tent and get the pin and put it into the temples of such an attitude, using the hammer of the word of God. The hammer is the mind of God applied in this matter.
G.C.S. You were speaking of the pin. Had you in mind in the scripture you quoted just now that God has chosen the weak things to confound what is wise? One was thinking of trouble coming in amongst us. Had you in mind that the tent-pin would suggest what is weak? One was thinking of those who carried the pins of the tabernacle. There was not much to show in carrying them.
W.J.H. I feel that some of us are losing our part in Israel because we fear losing our reputation. Let us give that up and deal with such an attitude, using the word of God as the hammer that breaks in pieces.
Many a difficulty would be overcome if a brother or sister would be prepared to own they are wrong, but that means they have to let their reputation go, which is in principle judging what the Canaanite represents.
G.W. In a time of weakness, God would come in, as He did in bringing Sisera into the tent, so that he could be dealt with.
W.J.H. She gave him milk. Typically she was accustomed to the word of God and the mind of God for that man was that he was to die. She applied the pin of her tent and the hammer of the word of God to slay him.
B.W. There was no compromise with her. She was marked by spirituality.
W.J.H. It says, “Blessed above women shall Jael ... be”, @Judges 5: 24.
{101}
Rem. It says, “She put her hand to the tent-pin, And her right hand to the workmen’s hammer”.
W.J.H. The right hand is the hand of power, and what she trusts as having power is the word of God. But nevertheless, in conjunction with the workmen’s hammer, no workman can do any work aright without the word of God, the pin is used as well. I desire that we get hold of that to value our tent-pins.
E.E. I am not aware that there is any description of the material that this tent-pin was made of, but there is an instruction about the pins of the tabernacle, which were made of copper.
W.J.H. Those pins that held the tabernacle down are the same idea. We have a tent individually in Israel and the pin that fastens the tent is the instrument that God uses here.
H.S.H. Was Naboth a man not prepared to be marked by Canaanitish features?
W.J.H. Very good. He valued his tent and place in Israel. He would not be interested in any other part or allotment, not even from a king. He would die rather than lose his tent and his vineyard. This Canaanitish principle will go if we value our place in the inheritance.
L.F. Reference has been made to valuing our place in the assembly. Is not one of our difficulties that some do not accept assembly judgments? This line results in losing our privileges.
W.J.H. Quite so; whereas honest acknowledgment of being wrong will secure our tent in Israel and secure the Canaanitish overthrow.
Perhaps we could now have a word or two about Midian, and the power that overthrew Midian. The word “Midian” means “contention”; Midian stands for the activities of contention amongst God’s people. In times of weakness they rise up and they multiply. “They came as grasshoppers for multitude; for both they and their
{102}
camels were without number”, and the result was that all the produce of the land was destroyed. There was no wheat, no barley, no olives, no vines, no pomegranates, no figs and no honey, because the Midianite had got the possession. This power is at our doors in a very real way in this city. It has been judged in one person who led in it, but may the Lord help us to judge it, everyone for ourselves: the activities of contention are very evil in the sight of God.
E.E. The apostle says, “But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of God”, @1 Corinthians 11: 16.
W.J.H. Thank God contention was not the custom of the churches of God. What happens where contention exists is that food disappears, joy disappears, unity disappears, the sweetness of spiritual relationships disappears, and the Midianite gets control. The Lord help us to judge and face this Midianitish foe!
R.S. Do you think we are contentious because we are not prepared to leave things entirely in the Lord’s hand?
W.J.H. It involves a lack of subjection -- insubjection leads to contention. There is no king. It is when there is a king that Midian cannot get a footing.
A.C. Do you not think that is really the crux of the whole matter: a lack of subjection to the Lord and to one another?
W.J.H. Quite so. Hence the Lord greatly blesses Gideon because he is labouring to preserve food for God’s people against the Midianites. He is a timid man, but God is with those who are seeking to bring in food and are not on lines of contention.
There was no king in Israel, but Gideon has in mind that Jehovah should be king. He said, “I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you, Jehovah will rule over you”, showing that he had come to the kingship of God in his soul.
{103}
E.E. One might refer again to Barnabas and Paul. Is it so that if a faithful word from the Lord is brought to bear on one who is erring, if it is not received on the part of the one who errs, contention will result?
W.J.H. Indeed, it is remarkable that Moab and Midian often work together. You find in the Old Testament those two powers are often together. “Sister’s son to Barnabas” introduced in relation to spiritual things is Moab, but the contention that follows is Midian.
A.E. Amalek is linked with Midian.
W.J.H. How quickly the flesh appears in time of contention! Other activities of the flesh soon arise when contention exists.
B.W. Is there anything in the incident between Paul and Peter, when Paul “withstood him to the face”? Then, as Peter judged it, he was able to speak about “our beloved brother Paul”.
W.J.H. What appears there was not so much contention, as dissimulation, and Paul names Peter and he names Barnabas. You may say, that is unkind. The divine way is to name the persons responsible. Peter was the first apostle, yet Paul says Peter “was to be blamed” and that “Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation”. That is not to discredit Peter and Barnabas, but to save them, and is an example to us all.
J.S. Is there anything in the thought that he had to throw down the altar that his father had built to Baal? Is Gideon thus clear of Moab as he faces Midian?
W.J.H. Very good. He stood against his father in that matter. He judged his father in principle in the matter. There is much instruction in the history of Gideon that we cannot pursue this afternoon, but one would suggest we look at the remarkable instruments that brought Midian down: 300 trumpets, 300 empty pitchers, 300 torches, and God turns the Midianitish army against itself.
G.T. We should not seek to blow the trumpet without
{104}
being self-judged.
W.J.H. How can you alarm anyone else if you have not been alarmed yourself? The idea of the trumpet, in this setting, is an alarm. Gideon would bring the trumpet’s terror into the hearts of the Midianites. But how could you blow such a trumpet if you had not judged contention in yourself?
G.T. He was not calling attention to himself, having judged himself.
W.J.H. Quite so. He says, as I do, you do; he is in keeping with the empty pitcher. He is an empty pitcher, that is, he is free of himself in the matter.
J.S.D. Why do they add to what Gideon said, and say, “The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon”?
W.J.H. They have discovered this is the weapon for the moment. This trumpet, this empty pitcher, this torch -- the sword of the Lord and of Gideon.
D.J.M. “That the surpassingness of the power may be of God”.
W.J.H. Very good. “But we have this treasure in earthen vessels”, @2 Corinthians 4: 7. Paul was prepared for his vessel to be broken so that the light of the mind of God might shine.
H.S.H. Might I refer back to verse 14. They say, “This is nothing else save the sword of Gideon”. Is this not the very weapon you have been speaking of as making way for food amongst the people of God?
W.J.H. “A cake of barley bread”, that is a remarkable instrument. A man who is moving in the power of resurrection will turn the whole of the camp upside down. That is a weapon of the Lord, and so is this trumpet, and this empty vessel, and this torch.
Rem. I wondered if the trumpet calls attention to that character of man.
W.J.H. It brings God in. When the trumpet is blown, God acts. You remember when they went round
{105}
Jericho, each day the seven priests blew with the trumpets, and the last day “the people shouted and they blew with the trumpets”, and that was the beginning of the end, it brought God into the matter.
K.F. It is a wonderful thing that Gideon was able to draw attention to himself, he must have been self-judged.
W.J.H. The Lord would help us in our exercises, that we might be self-judged, that the light of God might be there.
G.C.S. Would that not come out in a marked way with Abram and Lot? “Let there be no contention”, Abram said.
W.J.H. It was not his custom to contend.
B.W. Gideon had selected these men. As we are moving with God in this matter, He selects us for service.
W.J.H. That is a very testing matter; these 300 have learned to use the mercies of God and pass on, not being controlled by them. In times of difficulty such are the men God will use. All the others are sent back. It is a very important matter that we learn how to lap the water thankfully, but not be detained by it. Those who kneeled down to drink it were sent home. The nearer we draw to the end of this dispensation, the more we will need to lap the water.
Rem. Does leadership come into this? Gideon says, “As I do, so shall ye do”. The apostle Paul says, “Be my imitators, even as I also am of Christ”.
W.J.H. Quite so. He speaks of himself as a model. This is a model for us that we be able to bring God into the situation, that we have our vessels empty and the light of God shines as we accept the breaking of the vessel. Paul accepted the breaking up of the vessel so that the light might be clearer.
E.E. I think that is excellent. It seems to be exactly how the apostle Paul conducted himself, when in Corinth,
{106}
and also when he wrote to them.
W.J.H. How completely he was an empty vessel and then a broken one! Think of the list of his sufferings as in @2 Corinthians 11, he says, “I speak as a fool”, but it all discloses what he was prepared to suffer as to the earthen vessel, so that the light of God might shine.
These three hundred were all of one mind, and God acts. He turns the contentious persons on each other. They slay one another.
E.E.S.L. Is it significant that in the case of Barnabas the contention which arose between him and Paul, which was very sharp, was followed by Barnabas going back to Cyprus, his own country? He apparently falls out of the testimony and is active in his own interests.
W.J.H. I feel that is most solemn, for I am sure we all love the word that Barnabas “was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost”. We will never forget Barnabas¬ labours, but he was diverted from the testimony by allowing the influence of his sister’s son to take precedence over the word of God and the path of the testimony. That ought to be a warning to every brother and sister present.
L.F. You cannot get contention from an empty broken vessel.
W.J.H. What an opposite to contention, an empty vessel, accepting being broken; there is also the light, which is again the word. It is instructive that the word runs through these passages. The sword, which is the word; the hammer, which is the word; and the light, which is the word; and the jawbone is the power to assimilate the word, a fresh jawbone, a fresh enjoyment of the word of God will overthrow heaps upon heaps of Philistines.
S.G. Where contention is apparent, food goes and joy goes.
W.J.H. I think that is a matter we should consider
{107}
very feelingly. When the Midianites came in, they destroyed the produce of the land of Canaan. The land of Canaan produces wheat, that is Christ as He is in relation to the purpose of God; it produces barley, that is Christ in resurrection; it produces olives so that there is spirituality; it produces vines so that there is heavenly joy; it produces pomegranates so that there is true unity amongst the saints; it produces honey, the sweetest thing known to the heart; but the Midianite destroys them all.
B.O.L. Gideon greatly treasured what the land produced and he considered for Jehovah in the first place. Then in this chapter he has the consciousness, through the dream and interpretation, that Jehovah is going to consider for him. He has considered for Jehovah and now, going forth to the battle, he has the full assurance that God is with him.
E.E. Would you support the thought that we see it fully in the second epistle to Timothy, and yet there is a timid brother there?
W.J.H. I think it ought to encourage everyone who feels unequal to facing such a situation that the Lord would support us with the sense that He is with us, and Gideon follows that line until he is this empty vessel.
D.J.M. These three conflicts are all completed matters.
W.J.H. That is important. They are all finished. There will be another one from another angle, and the Lord will use someone entirely different. He uses men from quite a number of tribes. You never know where the Lord will take up one, but each of these matters is gone through and finished.
D.J.M. The matter with Moab did not stop at the king, there were the 10,000 men, and with Deborah they went after Sisera though the army had been destroyed. The Lord would speak to us not to leave matters unfinished.
{108}
W.J.H. What you say should help us to be with those who are seeking to finish matters.
The princes of Succoth would be neutral, till the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna were in the hand of Gideon. Often persons wait, till they see how things will go, before they are prepared to support what is right.
