{#GOD’S GLORIOUS END}
{1}
THE MINISTRY OF W. J. HOUSE
The ministry of W. J. House is of a deeply spiritual character as it is very seldom encountered amongst God’s people, especially at the present day. He never wrote expositions of the Bible or its books, but he ministered the things of God and of Christ as he saw the need of them, and as they came to hand; others put them down on paper as he spoke. He ministered as one that is led by the Spirit. Those that knew W. J. House personally (and there are a few older brethren and sisters still alive who did) say about him that he brought the presence and cheerfulness of Christ with himself wherever he went, and wherever he ministered.
W. J. House was a man who, like the apostles, lived what he preached. He adorned the doctrine of Christ in a very practical way. The spirit of his messages bears witness to the truth of this, for the things that he ministered were not made up of the shallow and superficial material that one acquires at Bible schools, Christian seminaries, schools of divinity and so on, but they are ministry directly from the throne of God and of the Lamb, like the streams of life and blessing that proceed forth from that throne to and through everyone who is
{2}
truly subject to it, and who is done with man, his institutions, organizations, thoughts and ways.
Seldom does one find ministry that brings the Lord Jesus so close to us and makes Him so dear to one’s heart. W. J. House, in his ministry, brings before us Christ, the Son of God and the Son of man, in a most marvellous way; and, after reading some of that precious ministry, in a certain way one can say as Job of old, “I have heard of Thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye seeth Thee.” Many of us have heard, read, and studied about Christ and His things, but W. J. House obviously lived in Christ’s presence, and walked and communed with Him. His ministry is not of that only too common analytical, academic, and rationalizing type, a carnal and basically erroneous approach to the Word of God, that is so abundant amongst us at the present day where there is so much of the intellect and for the intellect, and so dearly little that speaks to the heart and appeals to the conscience. What W. J. House ministered obviously was what he personally had seen with his eyes, what he had contemplated, and what he personally had experienced of the word of life; and his ministry can best be described as refreshing rivers of living waters that flowed out of his innermost being.
He could speak about the eternal city and the world to come; about their glories, loveliness, purity, and childlike simplicity in such a way that one could go on refreshed and renewed on the
{3}
pilgrim path for another day; having one’s eyes on the things not seen and yet eternal, forgetting and despising this present world with all it has to offer, having one’s eyes opened to all its falsehood, vanity, and pride by the loveliness and glories of that to come. But he could also discover to us the flesh with all its deceitfulness and subtleties.
The times we are living in are extremely difficult and confusing, both secularly and spiritually. The Apostle Paul, in his second epistle to Timothy, calls them perilous times, that is dangerous times full of spiritual pitfalls and snares. So often and so easily one loses the vision of heavenly things and the touch with spiritual realities.
As the Lord wills and enables us, we will republish much of the ministry of W. J. House for those which sigh and long for such ministry, and whose hearts and lives are affected by it unto more heavenly mindedness in all holy conversation and with all godliness; and, let us make sure that these writings do not become just some more collector’s items on our Brethren bookshelves. They are living ministry for a living people. Let us give thanks to Him who alone can give such gifts unto His church and who alone is able to prepare such servants; men that are comparatively little known and yet are truly the first amongst many.
Sad to say, there are those that can and will only too easily speak evil and in a derogatory way of W. J. House, for he was not of their particular partisan persuasion,
{4}
unsubdued disposition, and unbrokenness of heart and spirit; men that are full of themselves and their “correctness” in doctrine. Let us not be deceived nor misled by such. Let them first by a meek and quiet spirit and in childlike simplicity show forth their good works in all godliness and holy conversation, refraining their tongues and lips from all malice, guile, and evil speaking and thus approve themselves in the sight of God and commend themselves to the heart and conscience of all true and unfeigned lovers of the Lord Jesus. Let their froward and carnal zeal “on God’s behalf” first be replaced by subdued, spiritual, and self-denying service for Christ, ministering blessing instead of strife and contention. Such ministry, as that of W. J. House, will never have any appeal for those who harbour and cultivate the spirit and disposition of the Pharisees. W. J. House was truly amongst those, *who for His name’s sake went forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles*; the spirit of his ministry proves that only too well. All genuine lovers of our Lord Jesus Christ, *the friends that greet each other by name, therefore receive such that they might be fellow helpers to the truth* (see 3rd of John). W. J. House is long gone on to be with the Lord, but we can still receive his ministry which above all was according to godliness.
At the judgment seat of Christ God will give to every man as his work shall be. Then and there the hidden things of darkness and counsels of the heart shall
{5}
be made manifest, and none will be able anymore to hide his ill will, malice, and love of pre-eminence behind good words and fair speeches about “sound doctrine” and “scriptural separation”, deluding themselves and misleading those of simple minds.
Finally, we like to appeal to our readers, should you by any chance possess some of the ministry of W. J. House that you would like to see republished, please write to us and let us know about it; the greater part of his ministry appears to be worth republishing.
H.P.W. June, 1995
{6}
LEADERSHIP
@Isaiah 11: 6; @Revelation 12: 1 - 12
One desires, dear friends, to indicate a little the character of leadership that will enable us to go on together. We all, I have no doubt, realise that the great movement of the enemy -- of Satan -- is to destroy true leadership, indeed, that leadership should disappear, so that under the influence of democracy, which is Satan’s last weapon to destroy man, the idea of rulers and leaders should be hated. But leadership is of God; in every sphere controlled by God and by heaven that principle prevails. You find it, of course, in its fulness and perfection in Christ. He is the Prince or Leader -- “Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour” (@Acts 5: 31). He has been made *the* Leader. How often the Lord used the expression, both prophetically and when here, conveying the thought that He is the Leader. He says, “I lead” -- and He will always lead: He is God’s chosen and anointed Leader. What marks leaders is, that they lead. They do not have elections,
{7}
but they lead, as Deborah said in her song, “For that leaders led in Israel ... Bless Jehovah (@Judges 5: 2, N.T.) That is what the Lord will always do. He will lead in every sphere.
The same principle is seen amongst the angels, invulnerable hosts as they are, there is no democratic character among them; God has established among them princes, leaders -- an archangel is a prince (@Daniel 10: 13 and 21. @Jude 9). It is a principle that also exists in the assembly according to God. The Apostle says, “Remember your leaders”, and “Obey your leaders”, that is, God would raise up and maintain those who are qualified to lead. The Devil, while blinding men as to the evil of democracy, recognises no such principle; what he aims at is that *he* should be prince, the prince of this world, the great leader who leads the whole system -- that is what he believes in, and amongst his own hosts there are principalities and powers, there are mighty leaders of darkness -- “the rulers of the darkness of this world” (@Ephesians 6: 12). So one desires that the Lord might help us to see, first the great principle of leadership, and then to see the character of the one who is qualified to lead.
In the passage we read in Isaiah there is a wonderful statement. You have a wolf and a lamb, a leopard and a kid, a young lion and
{8}
a calf, and a fatted beast; and they are together. You say, “That is impossible”. One often feels in regard to certain local conditions that the position is impossible. You see such a divergence of character -- natural character -- such different natural temperaments and desires and outlooks, that at first glance we might think that those people can never go on together, they, will fall out before long; and so they will unless they are led. You would never keep a wolf and a lamb together naturally; or a leopard and a kid together; or a young lion and a fatted beast together, unless you have leadership of such a character, that the control is so great, that they are preserved from what they are naturally. Now what kind of a person could do that? The world would think -- we would all think naturally -- you want some mighty tyrant of indomitable will, who will compel every one to yield. That is the kind of leader that men will shortly get, he will come up out of the bottomless pit, and he will go into perdition and lead the world into perdition with him. But that is not what the Spirit of God speaks of as leadership. He says, “a little child shall lead them”. The influence of a little child is so great and powerful that it can make the wolf and the lamb lie down together -- it can alter the whole character of everything.
{9}
I wonder if we believe it. You can see it in scripture, and you can see it amongst ourselves. How is it possible that persons who would not walk together naturally go on together for years and years, and happily? It is because they are under the leadership of the little child, that is why. The mighty power o£ the little child is exercised over their hearts so they lie down together. That is what happened in regard of Saul of Tarsus. He was a wolf naturally; scattering, killing, ravening. He was a leopard, though he thought he had no spots, thought that he was blameless, he found out that he was indelibly spotted. He was a young lion, exceedingly mad, full of fury, when he roared, everyone feared. And there is Ananias, he is a lamb, defenceless, timid; he is a kid, separate from all that was going on in the world, in Damascus; he is a calf, pursuing his way patiently, serving others; and you see these two in Damascus together. Ananias goes to where Saul is, and he says, “Saul, brother; the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest hath sent me” (@Acts 9: 17). He approached at first timidly, fearing that he could never lie clown with such a man as that; but you see what had happened was that Saul had met the “little child” on the way to Damascus, he had met this “little child” who leads -- he had met
{10}
Jesus -- He was on the throne, but He was Jesus. As Saul pursues his way with these destructive features, the Lord says to him, “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” -- just like a little child would speak. Not like a great mighty ruler would speak, but just as a little child would speak. “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” As though He would say, “What have I done that you should hate Me without a cause and be mine enemy wrongfully?” -- As the Lord said in the psalm, “They hated me without a cause”. He never gave them any cause. He is saying that to Saul: “They that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully”, the Lord said, “are mighty” (@Psalm 69: 4), but it was just the approach of a little child, and Saul says, “Who art thou, Lord?” and the answer comes back, “I am *Jesus*” ... Jesus brings to our hearts all the features of a little child. And Saul comes under the mighty control and leadership of the “little child,” so that he says to Jesus, “*Lord*, what wilt thou have me to do?” The power of that approach was such that in principle he said to the Lord, knowing Him now as Jesus, “Lord, lead me,” and they took him by the hand and led him to Damascus.
Now there is the lamb in Damascus and the kid and the calf, and the Lord says -- to that one, “Ananias. And he said, Behold I am
{11}
here, Lord.” And the Lord said unto him, “Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judas for one called Saul of Tarsus: for behold, he prayeth”. Ananias said, as it were, “Lord, he is a lion, he is a leopard, he is a wolf”. “I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem: and here he hath authority from the chief priests to bind all that call upon thy name”. But the Lord said, “he is a chosen vessel unto me -- Go thy way”, and he goes down, and they lie down together, both of them led by this mighty power of the “little child”.
Now the scripture we read in Revelation shows us the power of the Man Child caught up to the throne of God, set in the place of supreme authority -- “unto God”, it says, “and his throne”. It is such that every feature of the power of evil disappears -- the result of the enthronement of the Man Child. The Spirit of God says, “the Man Child”; it does not view the Lord in that passage as having pursued His life through this world and reached maturity as to His years here, but He is looked upon in that passage as if taken up from birth, caught up to God and His throne -- the little Child is put on the throne of God in heaven, and the consequences of that are that the dragon, the old serpent, the Devil
{12}
and Satan, is cast out of heaven and there is no place found for him there. Now, that indicates for us, the enthronement in our hearts of Jesus, in the character of the Man Child, there is power that is capable of displacing the whole power of evil.
Every believer has available to him a power that will displace every character of evil; every local gathering has available to it in the enthronement of the Man Child, the power for casting out every kind of evil that may have a footing there. It is available to the church as a whole if only it be used, it is great enough to cleanse the heavens, it is great enough to cleanse -- and ultimately it will cleanse -- the earth. Do we believe it? That there is available to us, if we will allow the Man Child to rule, a power that will displace every principle of evil that exists, first in our own hearts, then where we are, and then ultimately, in the whole scene, heaven and earth. Now you might say, What does the catching up to God and His throne of the Man Child mean? It means that the power expressed in the Man Child, is such that it can displace evil in every form. Let us look for a moment at what; these features are, or some of them.
You see over against the Man Child is the great red dragon. What a contrast! Think of
{13}
a little Child, as this passage presents it, just born. “She brought forth”, it said, “a man child ... and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne”. Let, us have in our hearts that wonderful presentation of Christ over against the great red dragon. What a contrast! What marks the great red dragon is that it is an immense creature, it draws the third part of the stars of heaven with its tail. And the Spirit of God says it is red, that is, it is conspicuous in this world; there is no more conspicuous colour than red, you can see it anywhere. But look at a little child, how small it is, nothing large, nothing great outwardly, so lowly, so dependent, nothing conspicuous. What can you do with a little child in this world? Yet the consequence of the enthronement of the Man Child is that the dragon is cast out.
Look at the Lord Jesus. Think of Him in Bethlehem -- what lowliness! It says, “She brought forth her firstborn, son ... and laid him in a manger” -- there is nothing great, nothing conspicuous, about that. I doubt if any one else but Jesus ever had such a reception, certainly none of us, or anything like it. You follow Him through this scene at Nazareth; there is nothing great about Nazareth, and there is nothing great about Christ in Nazareth as this world accounts
{14}
greatness. You see Him going through His life in this world, how small He was! He had not where to lay His head. Ministered to by those who loved Him, but He had nothing of His own. See Him at Calvary, no feature of human greatness there, nothing conspicuous, nothing that this world calls great and notable there. If we will let that blessed Man Child come into our hearts and rule He will cast out the great red dragon so that no place is found for him. There is power in that blessed One, in Jesus, to displace everything.
Then, the old serpent. You think of Jesus in the character of a little child and you put alongside in contrast the old serpent -- what a contrast! No greater contrast could there be than a little child and the old serpent! What marks the old serpent from the outset is that he is the father of lies, he is the source of all deception, he is “more subtle than any beast of the field”. Subtlety, deception, lying and darkness -- all those elements come from the serpent, the old serpent. But when Jesus comes on the throne the old serpent is cast down and there is no place for him.
What marked Jesus, was transparency. Normally a little child is absolutely simple and transparent in everything, just what he is, and pretending to be nothing else he hides nothing. That was Jesus. He walked through this
{15}
scene in absolute transparency. At the trial the Lord demonstrates it: He said “I spake openly” -- “In secret,” He said, “have I said nothing ... ask them which heard me what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I said” (@John 18: 21). That is transparency: that is just what a little child is. The Lord said, “I spake openly ... and in secret have I said nothing”.
I believe a great deal of the trouble that exists between brethren, between families, and generally, has at the root of it a lie, some deception, some elements of darkness, that have not been judged, some covetous principles, there is something hidden at the bottom. When the Man Child comes on the throne the old serpent goes out, there is no place for him. That is what happened to Saul, he had a place of greatness in this world, he was of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Pharisee of the Pharisees, but when the Man Child was enthroned in his heart, all the greatness of Saul of Tarsus disappeared, and he was called Paul, which means “little”. That comes in remarkably as he is about to meet the sorcerer, Elymas the sorcerer, “child of the devil, enemy of all righteousness” -- how will he meet it? By becoming little; it is at that time it is said “who also is called Paul” -- that is how he meets it. Paul says,
{16}
consequent on Jesus being enthroned, we “have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God” (@2 Corinthians 4: 2). That is transparency. How did he become like that? By the Man Child being enthroned: and the old serpent was cast out and there was found no place for him.
The Spirit of God goes on to speak of the Devil. Could you conceive anything in greater contrast than the Man Child and the Devil? The Devil conveys to us all that is awful, all that is terrible. “Your adversary the devil”, it says, “as a roaring lion” (@1 Peter 5: 8). Nobody would care to approach a roaring lion, everyone would tremble at the thought of having to do with a roaring lion -- the Devil. But a little child is the most accessible of all: there is no one, there is nothing, so accessible as a little child, whether he be the child of a king or the child of a beggar, the normal condition of a little child is that anyone can approach him. The Man Child is on the throne, and the Devil is cast out, there is no place for him. How accessible Jesus was and is!
The shepherds could come with the utmost ease of heart and spirit into the presence of that little Child wrapped in swaddling clothes
{17}
and lying in a manger. There was no terror filling their hearts as they drew near to that wondrous spot. Simeon could take Him in his arms and bless God. The man full of leprosy dared not approach anybody on earth till he saw Jesus, and he came up, it says, and kneeled down. The woman of the city which was a sinner -- dared not to come near the Pharisee, he was too great; too unapproachable, but when she knew *Jesus* was there she brought a box of ointment and stood at His feet. A blind beggar could expect no audience with the great of this world, he dared not call out to them, but when he heard that Jesus was passing by, he cried “Jesus ... have mercy on me”. The dying thief, to whom could he go? Who would listen to a dying malefactor? Would Pilate? Never for a moment. Would Herod? Never! Would the priests? They would not look that way. Would the soldiers? Not at all; they would not disgrace their uniform. Would Jesus? Yes, he could approach Jesus. He is so blessedly accessible that he could appeal to Him.
We see also, that those who come under the influence of that blessed One on the throne become accessible. The apostle Paul was, I suppose, one of the most accessible men in the world after he called Jesus, Lord. Anyone who had a godly concern could write to him
{18}
and come to him, he was within reach indeed he said to the Corinthians who were reigning as kings, “we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus¬ sake”, (@2 Corinthians 4: 5).
The consequence of the enthronement of the Man Child is that Satan is cast out. Satan is the accuser, night and day he accuses the brethren before God. He hates them and he accuses them night and day. Jesus at the right hand of God intercedes for us, His mission there on the throne is to intercede: as the Apostle says, “who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us” (@Romans 8: 34). Could you have a greater contrast -- an Intercessor -- an abiding Intercessor: and one who night and day -- accuses! If the one rules, the other goes.
Dear friends, if we allow that blessed Man Child upon the throne of our hearts, upon the throne in the gatherings, the accuser of the brethren will be cast out, there will be no place for him. That is what marked the blessed Lord here; in all its brilliant glory it shines out at Calvary. They were accusing Him, accusing Him falsely. The accusations that they bring are false, but what does He do? He intercedes in the presence of those that hated Him without a cause.. Looking round upon the whole scene He does “not
{19}
accuse, He prays for them. As sure as that blessed One comes on the throne the accuser will be cast down. One would ask that each of us may face this question. There is ever a danger of accusation. That means, Jesus has lost His place in our hearts. That we no longer are being ruled by the One who rules in heaven. He is on the throne of God, He is caught up to God, it says, and His throne. We can never be right unless we are in accord with heaven, and on the throne of God is the Intercessor, and the consequence of that is, the accuser is cast out.
All the elements of darkness, of secrecy, of accusation behind the scenes, spring from Satan. It is well to face it. The origin of accusation is Satan. If there are things that *should* be said, they should be said *openly*. “I spake openly,” the Lord says. The source of all movements that are not open and transparent is the Devil. I would urge all of us to recognise that, and judge. “If thy brother,” it says, “shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault” (@Matthew 18: 15). Do we do it? Or do we accuse him? Do we go and see him? That is God’s way -- go and see him. The Lord ever spake openly. If only we will let that principle into our hearts, the accuser of the brethren will be cast down. What a power is in the Man
{20}
Child! He is the little Child that leads the lion and the calf, the leopard and the kid, the wolf and the lamb, so that they are *together* according to God.
You can see that worked out, a feature of the enthronement of the Man Child, most blessedly in Stephen. He “looked up”, it says, “and saw the glory of God and Jesus” (@Acts 7: 55). He looked up and he saw the Man Child on God’s throne and he took character from Him. His heart expanded to give place to Jesus in that character. As he kneeled down there was nothing like the great red dragon about him, he was a lone, dependent man under the rule of Jesus as Lord. He sees God. “Blessed” it says, “are the pure in heart, for they shall see God” (@Matthew 5: 8). And he saw the glory of God. There was nothing about Stephen that would terrify, though indeed they could not resist the spirit and the wisdom with which he spake. The Devil in his terrifying character in no way influenced Stephen. Satan, the accuser, had no place in his heart. As he saw Jesus on the throne, instead of accusing, for he might have accused them, he had cause to complain -- he intercedes. It says they gnashed on him with their teeth; he had never given them any occasion for it. They “ran upon him with one accord, and cast him out
{21}
of the city and stoned him”, but he did not accuse. Satan, the accuser of the brethren, had no entrance into his heart because Jesus was enthroned. He intercedes for them.
If there is that which is troubling us, do not let us accuse, but let us pray. God will come in if we pray, and if there is that which *should* be said, let it be, as with Stephen, said openly. Openly he said, “Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye”. There is nothing secret about it: but then, having said all that, he intercedes for them. He says, “Lord, lay not this sin to their charge”. There is a man who corresponds with heaven. As Jesus as the Man Child has His place on the throne of God, these awful features of Satan disappear from heaven, and as Jesus in this character is enthroned in our hearts and gatherings, so surely will those features disappear. Let us henceforth give place to this blessed One as Ruler, as Leader enthroned in this character. May the Lord grant it to us all.
GOD’S GLORIOUS END
@Luke 10: 38 - 42; @Luke 24: 50 - 53
One feels, dear friends, that we cannot too firmly lay hold of the divine principle that “better is the end of a thing than the beginning.” God would convey to our souls that there is a very wonderful time immediately ahead, and He would encourage us all to be in it -- whole-heartedly in it -- not to let anything stand in the way that would hinder our being in it. The thought runs through the Word of God -- take the heavens and the earth -- in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth -- but the new heavens and the new earth are better than the first heavens and the first earth, for they are going to pass away, they are going to disappear but the new heavens and the new earth will not disappear.
In the beginning the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden and there He put the man he had made. That Eden disappeared and nobody could find it -- men have tried but they cannot find it, but the paradise of God in Revelation does not disappear. God has a paradise that will not disappear, and
{22}
the blessed Man who is entrusted with the care of that paradise to dress and keep it for God will not disappear. The woman that God made at the beginning as a companion for the man and a help-meet disappeared, but we see in Revelation, the wife of the second Man will not disappear or deteriorate, site is as fresh in her affections and attire -- in the garments that she wears -- after a thousand years, as she was at the beginning. It is of God, wholly of God, to end with a brighter and more glorious character of things than He begins with.
With that in view I wanted to say a few words about the history of Bethany, to show how it began and how it ends and I think you will see that its end is better than its beginning. What one has in mind is that Bethany is a place, and it indicates what the Lord would have in a place -- what He would have in a village. This country has many villages as well as cities and towns. Bethany begins as a village and it indicates what the Lord would promote in a local setting. What a country this would be if every locality was characterised by the features of Bethany. Just think of Worcester as being really a Bethany, having the history of Bethany, beginning like Bethany and ending like Bethany; what a place it would be for the Lord! That
{23}
is what the Lord wants, and that is what He is doing. One would not hold these things out as impracticable for we see them coming to light in many places.
How did Bethany begin? I think the passage we read in the tenth chapter gives us the start of Bethany as scripture records it. The Lord was on a journey, the tenth chapter is very well known, “as He journeyed,” -- “a certain Samaritan” is there, one who is despised, one with whom the Jews have no dealings, the religious people had no dealings with the Samaritans. We know that is true, today, the name of Jesus makes many feel awkward. You have only to mention it and an uncomfortable feeling arises, people look more intently into their newspapers and novels -- He is despised and rejected of men. A certain Samaritan as He was journeying; it was a wonderful journey, there never was a journey like that. He was taking with Him oil and wine. He carried with Him the means of healing and filling the heart of man with joy. He was prepared to make available His own beast for the man that was ruined, nevertheless He had not where to lay His head. The Lord said, “the foxes have holes” -- cunning, destructive creatures who did harm to everyone, they have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; almost worthless many
{24}
of them, “are not two sparrows sold for a farthing?” -- they have nests, but the Son of man had not where to lay His head -- Jesus the Son of man.
In this journey He had no home and nobody wanted Him, everybody despised Him and then Martha appears. It says He went into a certain village, it is not named at all. Martha had been meditating, she had seen something of the dignity and greatness of Christ the true Ark in these unsuitable conditions and it says she received Him into her house. She indicates by that act that whatever was the feeling in the world, she felt that the place that the Lord had was wholly unsuitable and so she opens her house. It is hers and she receives Him into it. The Lord goes into her house, she receives Him there, what wonderful grace on the part of the Lord to accept what was available! He goes into that house and He accepts it -- He accepts the affections of her heart expressed thus. She finds room for Jesus in her heart and in her house and that is the beginning of the whole history of Bethany, it all came out of that. The next thing, of course, is what always happens, and that is the moment we are in touch with Christ we become aware that we need a lot of adjustment. You see in the world you can do as you like in the religious systems,
{25}
you can control it as you like and think and teach what you like, but the moment you come in touch with Christ in a living way, then you need to be adjusted.
The Lord Jesus proceeds with the work of adjustment, Martha begins to find fault with the Lord, questioning whether He really cared for her, she says, “Dost thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone?” How wonderfully the Lord answers her, “Martha, Martha”, what a wonderful touch that is. You do not find in scripture there are many occasions where the person’s name is repeated; it seems to convey the deep interest of the Lord -- that is the object of it. The Lord says, “Martha, Martha.” The Lord loved Martha, she was a choice vessel to His heart and so He puts her right. He says, “thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is needful”. The Lord corrects her and she does not resent the correction, she does not answer back; the Lord loves women who can be corrected. It says, “Jesus loved Martha”, that means -- that she was lovable, for that is how John always presents love. What did He love in Martha? He loved a woman who received Him into her house and then was ready to be corrected. You will never get on and provide a Bethany anywhere, if you are not ready to be corrected.
{26}
If we think we know, we do not like correction, but there will never be a Bethany on those lines. Show me a brother or a sister that is ready to be corrected of the Lord, even if it comes through the brethren or the ministry as it mostly does, and I will show you an element that will soon form part of Bethany.
The next feature that comes to light, is seen in Mary sitting at His feet listening to His word. She had seen one great thing, the greatest of all, that beyond all the service she could render to Him, the greatest thing was to know His mind, to listen to His word. I wonder if there is a Christian heart that has not reached that, who lives, as many do, in what they are doing. How much they are doing, that is their life, and they might even be seeking humbly to do it for the Lord. But the Lord says that “Mary hath chosen that good part”. To listen to His word, to allow Him to teach you, that is what is so lacking amongst Christians generally; they do not allow the Lord to teach them, they are converted and they set out to work; they are busily engaged doing something and they do not allow the Lord to teach them. But Mary is sitting at His feet and listening to His word.
The Lord loved Mary and Martha and then Lazarus appears afterwards. He is not mentioned here, but he is added to this community.
{27}
What marks Lazarus is that he is “our friend”; you must have friends to have a Bethany -- “our friend” not only the Lord’s friend. The Lord could say “our friend”; he not only loved the Lord but he loved the brethren, he loved them all. The Lord did not say, “Mine, and Peter’s and John’s”, but He says to them “*our* friend, Lazarus”. Jesus loved Lazarus -- “now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister and Lazarus.” That is how the thing began and how wonderfully it developed. The Lord found more joy in Bethany than in any other place on earth. He loved to go there.
Take that one day, it does not tell us when it was, but in the gospel of Mark we read that one day He went to Jerusalem and He went into the temple and looked round on everything, and what did He see? What sorrow must have filled His heart when He looked round on the temple of God and He saw merchandise in it. He saw that it had become a great business establishment where trade was going on. As He looked, round what must have been His feelings. In that look He saw thieves there, not one or two but a den of them, usurping in the very house of God the place that belonged to God. It says He looked round on everything. Let us remember that when the Lord comes into a
{28}
place He looks round on everything; nothing escapes His notice, every single thing that goes on in that which professes to be the house of God is scrutinised by Christ, and He feels it. He felt it so much on one occasion that He made a whip of small cords and He drove out certain things from the temple as it is said -- “the zeal of thine house hath eaten, me up (or devours me)”.
In the gospel of Mark having looked round on everything He went out, and I believe He does that today, He has left it. You can see that abroad in Christendom. He has seen the den of thieves in it. He has seen the trading operations in the professing church. In the book of Ezekiel what comes to light is that there is an idol set up in the temple. What idolatry is going on! -- think of Rome what idolatry is going on in the temple! -- but it says He went out, and where did He go? With sorrow in His heart, as He saw what was in the temple. He went out and went to Bethany. Bethany would provide for His heart the true features of the house of God; the true features of the temple; the place where He could find what He looked for -- Bethany means the “house of figs”. It is where divine sweetness is ministered to Christ, where the sweetness of divine affections operating in the hearts of men and women become
{29}
available to the Lord. That is what the house of God should be, what: the temple should be. It says the next day He came back again and He saw a fig tree and He looked for figs, what He had had in Bethany that evening -- it was eventide. He spent the night, the dark night of all that He found in the temple, in Bethany, and He had figs there. He came back and He saw a fig tree in Jerusalem and He looked for figs but did not find any, and He cursed the fig tree. That is what is going to happen almost immediately to that system that rejects Christ and usurps what belongs to Him; it is coming under a divine curse, and that shortly. The fact is, that the Lord found in Bethany what He did not find in the temple, for He left it and went to Bethany.
Then in @John 12 we read that “six days before the Passover” He came to Bethany. What the Passover must have meant to the Lord; He had six more days to be amongst men, to move about in this world to feel for six days what man is. How it was upon His spirit! And then comes the Passover. The apostle Paul tells us, about it. He says, “Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us” Think of the sacrifice of the Passover -- sacrifice means the cost, think of the cost to the Lord of the Passover with all the fire of divine judgment so soon to come upon Him! When the
{30}
Lamb has to be roast with fire, when the blood must be shed and put in a basin -- the Lord alone knew what that sacrifice meant in its fulness -- it was upon His spirit, and it says six days before the Passover He came to Bethany. What for? To have some figs, to have His heart refreshed with the sweetness of those affections which were in Bethany, such as would be eternally His through the sacrifice that He was going to make He came to Bethany, what a spot it was! -- the gold was there, what affections permeated that town, for it was the town of Mary and her sister Martha! The gold of divine affections could be seen there, gold of Ophir. The silver is there, the Lord is owned and recognised -- the previous chapter brings that out. “Lord,” says Martha, “behold he whom thou lovest is sick,” and again, “Lord if thou hadst been here”; the Lord is recognised in that place. Six days before the Passover the Lord came to Bethany to find fruit for His own heart, the blessed fruit of love that the Passover would secure for Him -- what was known in Bethany was the greatness of that blessed One. It began to dawn on Martha, when she received Him into her house, and Mary when she listened to His word.
Now the eleventh chapter of John unfolds more and more, the greatness and glory of the Son
{31}
of God; how He had come to Bethany, in order to unfold to their hearts the glory of God and His own glory, that is why He allowed Lazarus to die. He remained two days where He was deliberately, so that He might go down and manifest to them in Bethany the glory of God. What a spot Bethany was! The glory of the Son of God is known there. He was not known in Jerusalem; He was not known in that which was outwardly the temple, but He was known in Bethany. “This sickness,” says the Lord, “is not unto death but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified” -- and then they learn what they had never known before, the intensity of His love -- Jesus wept -- that was in Bethany. They knew in Bethany both the glory of His person and the intensity of His love. Even the Jews that were there said, “Behold how he loved him”. Then Martha appeared again, you remember, still needing some adjustment, still ready to accept it. The Lord said, “Take ye away the stone”. Martha intervened to correct the Lord again. She did not want what was there exposed, but we never have a Bethany unless we let the Lord expose what ought to be exposed. You see, if in this town there is secret corruption hidden away, you could not have a Bethany while that was there. You could not
{32}
have the blessed joy of the twelfth chapter of John if the stone is not rolled away.
I would urge us to face what ought to be faced, if there is some moral element of corruption that ought to be faced, roll away the stone, the Lord can deal with it. It may be dreadful for the moment, but then the power of the Lord is manifest. In the twelfth chapter they make Him a supper. The nails that bind everything together are there -- *they* make Him a supper, not Mary, not Martha, not Lazarus alone but *they* do it. They are all in it now, bound together in one common desire to provide for Christ in Bethany and the Lord came *there*.
He came there six days before the Passover to feed upon the sweetness of those figs, the blessed sweetness of the affections in Martha that would serve and in Lazarus that would find his joy in sitting with Him. He was “one of them that sat at the table with him.” Lazarus could not have been happier as a true friend than just to sit with Him. It does not say he said anything, he just sat there with Him, and the Lord loved that. Mary took a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment. The Lord went there to get it from Martha and Lazarus and Mary, and He would not have that interfered with
{33}
under any circumstances. Judas was there, Judas crept in hiding the real thoughts of his heart, he says, “Why this waste?” But he did not really care for the poor, that sort of people never do; you hear people talking a lot about the poor, but they do not really care for them, they keep a bag. Judas had a bag, but the Lord comes in authoritatively. He says, “Let her alone” -- there is no option about it. He will come in if there is a Bethany anywhere and if anyone dares to spoil that, the Lord will rebuke it. He will give a word of authority.
In the fourteenth chapter of Mark, two days before His death the chief priests and scribes and elders took counsel together as to how they might kill Him. It is not now the Passover aspect of the sacrifice of Christ, but it is the murderous spirit that hates Him in the world. It is within two days and they take counsel to kill Him; where will He go? As the murderous spirit of hatred rises where does Jesus go? “Being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper” -- that is where He was, only two days before His murder. With the very spirit of it in the atmosphere around He retires into Bethany to receive there the expression of the glorious dignity of His person from somebody’s heart. It says “a woman”; it does not name her, but He goes into that
{34}
house for His blessed head to be anointed, to receive the worshipful adoration of His glorious Person from somebody’s heart. He goes to Bethany.
That brings us to the twenty-fourth chapter of Luke; the Lord is now out of death. He has sojourned for forty days with His disciples going in and out, we do not know everywhere He went, but scripture indicates that He went to many places. He appears here and there, and He can go where He will, you could not restrict a man out of death. He is not subject to any of the limitations which in grace He accepted in flesh and blood. He can go into the midst when the doors are shut. He can appear on the road to Emmaus and then vanish. He could appear to 500 brethren at once and disappear again. But now the forty days are over and it has come to the last day of His presence on earth. What will He do? Where will He go? He led them, everyone that loved Him, out of that murderous city, out from the place where the temple was that had become a den of thieves, as far as to Bethany. What a signal stamp of divine approval on Bethany, the last spot on earth that ever saw Him; the last place that He is found in. It indicates that He not only wants Mary and Martha and Lazarus there, but He wants all His own there, He led them. He wants
{35}
Peter there. He wants Mary Magdalene, He wants Mary the mother of Jesus there. He wants all His own at Bethany -- He led them there. That is what He is doing now. He is leading many a heart out of the religious systems of this world, out of the dark spirit of murder and hatred that is abroad in the world, out from mere formal religion so hateful to Christ, to a spot where He is ministered to. He led them out from everything and there He lifted up His hands and blessed them. That is where divine blessing is, in Bethany. He lifted up His priestly hands in blessing there. They know where He is gone, for He was parted from them and carried up into heaven from that spot.
What marks the professing systems of religion is that they do not know where Christ is. “As for this man Moses we know not what has become of him”; they have lost all touch with Him. But in Bethany they saw Him, they were all there and He is parted from them and carried up into heaven, they beholding Him. Each of their hearts filled, they return with great joy -- what a stamp of divine approval on Bethany that it should be the last spot. When going away for a long time, we always leave the spot we love most until the last. A man finally breaks with his home, he says “good-bye” in his office and among his
{36}
general friends and acquaintances, but he leaves his home until the last; it is the last act to say “good-bye” at home. That is what Bethany was to Jesus; it is the last spot that He leaves. The angel says “This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven shall so come in like manner.” He is coming soon and He wants the features of Bethany. He wants all the saints to correspond with Bethany when He comes to receive them.
May the Lord help us to begin, by just opening out our hearts and our houses and giving a place to Christ in this world of His rejection. If we are prepared for correction, it will lead on until there is a spot where the Lord will find the very house of figs standing out in wonderful contrast to what He had in this world. They gave Him vinegar mingled with gall, the most bitter substance that human lips can taste, but over against that is Bethany, the house of figs. The Lord loved Bethany and He would like to see a Bethany in every locality where His own are. May it be so more definitely with us all.
{37}
THE COMING CITY
@Hebrews 13: 12 - 14
One has been impressed, recently, by the way the Spirit of God speaks of the world and of the darkness. It says, “the world passeth away and the lust thereof” (@1 John 2: 17), and the Apostle intimates that the darkness is passing, meaning, as I believe, that these moral powers and influences are gradually seen to be disappearing; “passing” being a gradual thought, not that it *has passed*, and not that it *will pass* only, but that it *is passing* in the view of God’s people. Any moment may be the last phase, any moment the final act of the disappearance may take place; and so indeed with the power that is coming in this world. John says, “I saw a beast rising out of the sea” (@Revelation 13: 1). “And I saw another beast rising out of the earth” (@Revelation 13: 11) in the same way, implying the gradual unfoldings of the satanic mind.
Now, I believe we are in one of the most solemn moments of the history of time, and God is helping His people to accept it. We are witnessing the disappearing of the world
{38}
system; the very foundations are giving way. The things that were regarded in the world system as impregnable are falling to pieces, and mighty forces of darkness, which will dominate the world, are rising. The full power is not here yet; thank God the assembly will not be here when the full power of the Antichrist is felt. Now the Apostle says, “We have not here an abiding city, but we seek the coming one” (@Hebrews 13: 14). There is a city coming, not that it *will* come exactly, or that it *has* come, but it is *coming*. It is getting nearer every day. I believe if we make more room for the Spirit of God, that city would become very great to us. In one sense we *have come* to this city, as in @Hebrews 12: 22, “Ye have come to mount Zion and to the city of the living God”, meaning that it is here by the work of God, by the Spirit’s work, in the hearts of the saints; the holy city, the heavenly Jerusalem is here. It is here, but then it is also coming, coming into display, and one desires to say a few words about this coming city.
There are cities that are *going*. It says of Cain that he “went out from the presence of Jehovah ... and he built a city” (@Genesis 4: 16 - 17). There he settled instead of accepting the judgment of God as being “a wanderer and a fugitive on the earth” (@Genesis 4: 14).
{39}
He was content to live without God in his own city, but that city has gone. Then after the flood, they say “Come on, let us build ourselves a city and a tower, the top of which may reach to the heavens” (@Genesis 11: 4). That city has disappeared with all its pride and intellect and glory; it has gone. Then we read of the cities of the plain, Sodom and Gomorrah. What cities they were! Concentrated corruption -- which the world’s cities are, and God has turned those cities into ashes and “condemned them with an overthrow, setting them as an example to those that should afterwards live an ungodly life” (@2 Peter 2: 6). They “lie there”, it says, “as an example, undergoing the judgment of eternal fire” (@Jude 7). They lie there as a witness to God’s eternal displeasure at what Sodom and Gomorrah represent. Then there is Babylon that Nebuchadnezzar built: “Is not this great Babylon, which I have built?” (@Daniel 4: 30). That city has gone -- God has touched it. And then Nineveh, that exceeding great city of human pride and glory, can hardly be found.
They are the cities, amongst others, that have gone. Then there are the cities that are *going*. London is one of them, it is a *going* city -- the metropolis of the world. And Rome, too, in its pride; it is called the Eternal City; but it is a doomed city; it is a city that
{40}
is going to disappear in the judgment of God. New York is the same. They are all going. We all naturally love to glory in our cities, but they are the *going* cities -- every one of them. Then there is that great city Babylon, spiritually. It is not a literal city, as we speak, but a vast religious system in which man exalts himself and usurps the place of Christ and ultimately, of God. That will eventually disappear. It is well for us to take that into account, lest we touch it. God says, “Come out of her, my people, that ye have not fellowship in her sins, and that ye do not receive of her plagues” (@Revelation 18: 4). It is disloyal to Christ and unfaithful to His blessed Name, and God appeals to us. Is there a believer here who is linked with that system? It is “called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified” (@Revelation 11: 8). God would say to you, Come out of her, my people. Tyre is another city that is falling. Tyre is the great commercial system of the world and Tyre is being overthrown. It is coupled with the fall of Babylon. They all weep because the whole system is falling to pieces, and it is not difficult to see that they are the *going* cities today.
The heavenly Jerusalem is the *coming* city. “We seek the coming one” (@Hebrews 13: 14). One desires to encourage every heart to seek
{41}
that city, to be characterised, by the Lord’s help, by the features of that city. Now what are these features? The Psalmist makes it clear: “*Glorious* things are spoken of thee, O city of God” (@Psalm 87: 3). What can be said about that city? Glorious things! The Psalmist says, “*Glorious* things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah”. What fills one’s heart with thankfulness today is the kind of things that are said from the hearts of the saints. Speaking of divine things in a merely mental way is worthless. “Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother” (@Galatians 4: 26). You would not do otherwise than speak with affection and interest of that, and that is how the Lord wants us to speak of “Jerusalem above, which is our mother”. It says “we seek the coming one”, so that with deep exercise of heart we refuse every other feature, and we seek through the Lord’s grace to have these features now.
Now as to the heavenly Jerusalem, the coming city, John hears the word, “Come here, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife. And he carried me away in the Spirit and set me on a great and high mountain and showed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God” (@Revelation 21: 9 - 11). Now I believe that is the first thing. What glorious things can be said about it! This heavenly city,
{42}
is the bride, the Lamb’s wife! It is a company that prefers Christ to everything. That is what the Spirit of God is engaged in at this time, to bring that blessed One, the Bridegroom, into evidence. “He that hath the bride is the bridegroom” (@John 3: 29). What marks the bridegroom is that he has the bride. That means he has her heart, not one affection diverted from him. That is a *glorious* thing, is it not? That displaces every unsuitable feature. It is no good trying to force the love of money and so on out of our hearts, it is making room for the blessed Person of Christ, that secures as a result that the Bridegroom has the bride. Then it says “the Lamb’s wife”. What a *glorious* thing that is to speak of as to the heavenly city! Who is the Lamb? In this book He is the One that has been slain, it is “a lamb standing as slain” (@Revelation 5: 6). One who sacrificed everything, His life, His all, One who never asserted His right to anything. This wonderful city is the compensation He gets for His sufferings. Let us have the features of the bride that prefers Christ to everything and to provide for Him a compensation for His own heart for all His suffering.
Then the city is referred to as “having the glory of God”. That is what I want to speak of now. This coming city has the glory of
{43}
God. Think of God entrusting His glory to anything created. Here is a city, to which God can entrust His glory. Let us seek to be so trustworthy that God can give us a ray of His glory. That He can commit to us the outshining of what He is. It may work out in many ways, for one can never compass His glory. Here is a city that displays what God is. God can trust this city with His glory! How unfaithful we often are! The Lord has given us something, and we have used it to display ourselves; but God’s work in our hearts is that He may have a city which He can trust with His glory. One would commend it to each one of us that we might seek with all our hearts to be trustworthy, to receive rays of the divine glory and express it.
I would like to say a word about the gates, in one connection only. You will remember there were twelve gates, three of them on each side and they were never shut. “And its gates shall not be shut at all by day, for night shall not be there” (@Revelation 21: 25). I want, with the Lord’s help, to suggest that we seek that feature. That we are always accessible. The wall effectually keeps out all the unholy elements. Let defilement, pride, will, or human glory come along and the wall will safely exclude it, but let a movement that is right, however feeble, appear, the gates are
{44}
always open and there is no night there. It means they are *always* open. The more we are in touch with God the more accessible we are. God is supremely accessible. God, “the God of Jacob is our high fortress. Selah” (@Psalm 46: 7). He says in the prophet, “Come now, let us reason together, saith Jehovah” (@Isaiah 1: 18). Come, and speak with Me! That is God! Was there anyone accessible like Jesus? Nobody had any difficulty to approach Jesus -- the Babe in the manger; anyone could go there if they could humble themselves to go! At every point, to every right movement towards God, He was accessible. Zacchaeus may be up a tree with a desire to see Jesus who He was -- “Make haste and come down for today I must abide at thy house” (@Luke 19: 5) says this blessed accessible One.
There is a danger, because we may have light, of putting a fence round ourselves, but the more we are in touch with God and with Christ the more accessible to every right movement we shall be. That is one of the glorious things that are spoken of in the city of God, that the gates are never shut. You can come at any time. Now, dear brethren, let us seek this “coming” city. Thus you bring the city nearer and nearer until it is actually here. Well then there is another feature of profound importance. There is one street in that
{45}
city, just one! Everybody that comes into it walks in it. The apostle Paul says “many walk, of whom I have told you often and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly and their glory in their shame, who mind earthly things” (@Philippians 3: 18 - 19). They are not in that city. Then he speaks of others who “walk in darkness”. I would appeal to every one of us to judge the first movement of a desire to hide anything from one another. Is there one matter we seek to hide from our brethren? If we walk along that street of transparent glass, we have nothing to hide. Everything is transparent. That helps us to walk together because we are all in that street. Peter and John went up to the temple together. Peter was different to John. His service was different, the work of God in him was different. Peter had nothing to hide from John and John had nothing to hide from Peter. They wanted that Name honoured, each of them; the Name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, so they walk together! And the word is “Look on *us*” (@Acts 3: 4). In every locality, in every city, one would long to hear that -- “Look on us”. Two men walking together is a sight for anyone to see, for heaven to see, for a poor cripple to see!
{46}
Then, in that city there is “a river of water of life, bright as crystal, going out of the throne of God and of the Lamb” (@Revelation 22: 1). What a river! Two things mark the world’s rivers. One is that they have been discovered to be blood; the river of Egypt has been discovered to be that. It is not a secret now, it brings death. None of us go there, I trust. The other thing is that the day is near when a star called Wormwood will fall “upon the third part of the rivers and upon the fountains of waters; ... and the third part of the waters became wormwood: and many of the men died because they were made bitter” (@Revelation 8: 10 - 11). You ask business men what they think about the water they drink. They say. Oh! it is so bitter. All the pleasures of this world that men seek to gratify their hearts with are getting bitter, and God intends to make them more bitter. That is the government of God. But there is another river, the water of *life*, pure and spotless, blessed stream! “The river of God is full of water” (@Psalm 65: 9). It will flow into every one of our hearts. “The streams thereof make glad the city of God” (@Psalm 46: 4) . Where does it come from? How can we get it? It only comes from one source. The throne of God and of the Lamb. You say, what does that mean? It means “subjection”.
{47}
We are to have that through eternity; it is a theme that is never to die. Subjection to God and subjection to the Lamb. The giving up of my will, that is what it means. From the moment that Satan lifted up his hand against the throne of God, every conflict that has happened in the world, in local assemblies, in families, in individual hearts, has centred round this. If we would bow to the will of God and give up our own wills, what would happen? Immediate access to this blessed river -- it would satisfy us for ever! I would appeal to the young as to the surrender of our own wills. As subject to the will of God we will have immediate access to this river.
Now there is one other thing. “The city has no need of the sun nor of the moon that they should shine for it, for the glory of God has enlightened it and the lamp thereof is the Lamb” (@Revelation 21: 23). God is the light thereof. He shall shine upon it and the Lamb is the lamp thereof. I believe that is intensely important to us today, to seek it with all our hearts, to seek the city that does not need any lamp. God is the source of light and in that city God shines upon everything. The blessed Person by whom God distributes that light is the One that suffered for us, our Redeemer and Saviour. It means the exclusion of
{48}
human light, however much it may be regarded, particularly in the religious world. The Lord wants us to keep these influences outside and would urge upon the young particularly to have nothing to do with them. They may appear attractive, but they do not come from God.
Well, one just desires to leave these few thoughts with us. There is much more that could be said about this wonderful city. “His servants shall serve him and they shall see his face and his name is on their foreheads” (@Revelation 22: 3 - 4). What could be said about that? But I only wanted to indicate that this city is coming, and one believes that it is getting nearer. The Lord is working in many hearts to bring these features into existence -- the exclusion of evil, to welcome what is of God, to secure the affections of our hearts for Christ alone, to make us accessible to one another, to set up His supreme throne, that no other will is allowed in our hearts and thus the crystal stream of living water flows and is available to our hearts as we are subject. May the Lord help us to seek these features with all our heart.
