{#THE PERSON OF CHRIST}
{1}
“THE SERVICE OF GOD”
@Philippians 2: 1 - 8; @Exodus 21: 1 - 6; @1 Corinthians 15: 23 - 28
One has the desire, dear brethren, that this occasion might be one that the Lord may use to bring about in each heart, and in each of our lives, correspondence with that feature of the Holy City that is expressed in those words in the twenty-second chapter of Revelation -- “His servants shall serve Him: And they shall see His face; and His name shall be in their foreheads” -- and that there might be, in the Lord’s goodness to us, that sown in our hearts which will make that blessed feature which will yet come out in display when the City appears, more true and more living with regard to every one of us. For it says that “His servants shall serve Him.” In that blessed day every other object of service will have vanished eternally. There will not be, in the scene that is depicted in the twenty-first and twenty-second chapters of Revelation, a rival to the service of our hearts eternally. We shall serve *Him*! We have all known in various degrees what it is to serve others. The very principle of human life under the influence of Satan is that self is served. And then it speaks of serving divers lusts and pleasures. Divers
{2}
lusts and divers pleasures call for the service of human hearts, and the time past suffices to have done the will of the Gentiles with every one of us. The prophet Elijah said, “If the Lord be God, serve Him; and if Baal, serve him” (@1 Kings 18: 21). But there is coming a moment when it is said, “His servants shall serve Him,” and that is eternally. That is never, never to be altered. The object of our service eternally, in holiness and purity and transparency, is to be God. “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve.”
I desire that we might stand definitely committed to the service of God. In looking upon the faces of so many dear young men and women, one’s longing goes out that their lives might in a definite way be committed to the service of God.
And so one would like to speak of the One under whose influence alone we can serve God. The Apostle Paul and Timothy are spoken of in this way. “Paul and Timotheus, bondmen of Jesus Christ” (@Philippians 1: 1). They were two bondmen, two men who were bound as servants in the service of Jesus Christ. John joins them. He says, “The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his bondmen things which must shortly come to pass; and He sent and signified it by His angel unto *His bondmen John*” (@Revelation 1: 1). His bondman John. James says, “James, bondman
{3}
of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ” (@James 1: 1). And Jude likewise. They are seen as the bondmen of God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
When the Queen of Sheba came up from the south to see the glory of Solomon, and hear his wisdom, she received such an impression of the majesty and greatness of the king, that in the overflow of her heart she said this: “Happy are these thy servants.” If you could have asked Paul, Timothy, John, James and Peter, they would have said “Amen” to that. They would have said that their blessedness consisted in that they were privileged to serve such a King, because they had been eye-witnesses of His majesty. They knew something of the greatness of the One Whom they served, and they lived to serve Him.
And so, dear brethren, one would like just to say a few words to direct our hearts to God’s Servant. *God’s Servant*! in order that, impressed by the blessed footsteps of that Servant we might come under His influence in holy affection, to be also the servants of God.
Before one touches that, I would like just to say this. I do not know anything more disastrous to God having His portion in service from our hearts than to think of God’s servants as a specially privileged class; for to limit in our minds and desires God’s servants to those who are specially gifted, is
{4}
not the divine thought. The thought of God is that His servants shall serve Him, and that we are all to be His servants. Everyone who loves Christ is intended to come under the constraining influence of that love, so that he lives for the One Who died for him and rose again. The service I would speak of tonight is the service of God, coming out in ten thousand ways, I know, but available to every one of God’s people.
I would like just to follow the path of service of that One of Whom God says “Behold My servant, Mine elect Whom I have chosen, in Whom My soul delighted.” (@Isaiah 42: 1). There had been other servants before Him. God said to Satan “Hast thou considered my servant, Job?” (@Job 1: 8). Job was one of God’s servants; and Moses was a servant faithful in all the house of God; and of David, He says: “I have found David My servant.”
But God says of the Lord Jesus: “Behold My Servant!” He calls the attention of every heart that knows God, that fears God, to the blessed Lord Jesus Christ. He says: “Behold My Servant!” That is the One to look upon, and from Whom to learn in our various measures how to serve God.
Now I wanted to say a little about the verses in the second chapter of Philippians. We have there, dear brethren, the commencement of the pathway of service of the
{5}
Lord Jesus Christ. We have the beginning of that service. What preceded it, who can speak about? Who, being in the form of God, thought it not something to be grasped after, something to put out the hand and reach up to, to be called equal with God. What human lips can speak of that? All that we can say is this, that what marks God is omnipotent supremacy. It says: “Who commanded the light to shine out of darkness.” That is what God did. He said: “Let there be light,” and there was light. He gave the sea His decree that its waters should not pass His commandment. That is how God acts. He said “Let the dry land appear.” Who can say “What doest Thou?” What marks God is absolute supremacy. He lays down things finally as His commandment. He commanded the light. The Lord Jesus is said to have been in the form of God. All things were created by Him, and without Him was not anything made that was made. But there came a moment when, in the Scripture we have read, He took a bondman’s form. “Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but made Himself of no reputation, and took upon Himself a bondman’s (or a servant’s) form; and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself.” (@Philippians 2: 6 - 8). That is, the Lord Jesus Christ, in the blessed greatness of His own choice, chose
{6}
to become God’s bondman, God’s servant, bound to the will of God -- bound to it! Henceforth the blessed One Who had the right to command -- the fiat of His will none could refuse -- chose to become God’s bondman, in order to carry out the will of God.
And so He enters this world, “being found in fashion as a man.” And so we come in our thoughts to Him at Bethlehem. There appears at Bethlehem God’s bondman, One Who has come down to do God’s will, and to serve Him. And there appears a multitude of other servants. “There appeared a multitude of the heavenly host” -- part of the company of those of whom it is said: “Ye ministers of His that do His will.” He makes His angels ministers or servants. He makes them ministers, and a vast company of ministers or servants appear to announce the wondrous fact that God’s blessed Servant has appeared in this world, with the object of bringing glory to God. He has come here so that there should be glory to God and peace on earth, and that the pleasure of God in men should be secured for ever. Those blessed ministers announce this fact. The beloved poet has said:
But who Thy path of service,
Thy steps removed from ill,
Thy patient love to serve us,
With human tongue can tell?
{7}
That pathway of service was begun at Bethlehem. Who can speak of it? We follow this blessed Servant, committed to the will of God, and the first words we hear from His lips are these -- at twelve years of age, just when those at that age are beginning to indicate, as we know, the bent of their lives (I suppose up to twelve years children are marked by being more or less governed by the will of others, but at twelve years of age a child’s mind begins to manifest itself, the bent of its heart comes to light), it says of the Lord Jesus at twelve years, as Mary comes to Him and says “Why hast Thou dealt thus with us?” He says to them “Did ye not know that I must be about My Father’s business?” (@Luke 2: 48 - 49). “Did ye not know?” The first recorded words of the Lord Jesus were these: “Did ye not know that I must be about My Father’s business?” ‘I am committed to His will. Even at twelve years I am committed to His will.’ There may be some of twelve years here, with tender hearts. Let that blessed word come before you. “Did ye not know,” says the Lord at twelve, “that as God’s bondman I must be about My Father’s business?”
And then the next time we see the Lord, we see Him coming up out of Jordan, beginning to be about thirty years old. When a man is thirty, it is apparent to all what he is after. The object of every man is manifest
{8}
at thirty. What will he do? What is he here for? Being about thirty years old Jesus was baptised, and, coming up out of the water, we read that the heavens were opened and the Holy Spirit descended as a dove, and abode upon Him. And God said “This is My beloved Son, in Whom I have found My delight” (@Matthew 3: 17). It corresponds with the Old Testament Scripture ‘I have found David My servant. With My holy oil have I anointed Him.’ At that wonderful moment, God publicly anoints Jesus with His holy oil as His Servant. ‘I have found David My Servant. With My holy oil have I anointed Him.’ You see the Lord Jesus step out from that moment publicly to do His will, committed to a life of devoted service to the will of God.
We follow Him to Sychar’s well, weary with His journey, sitting thus on the well. What for? To serve God. I know He serves the poor, sinful woman who comes to Him; one who had gone down to the sink of corruption and drunk of its filth; one who had gone also to Jacob’s well and drunk out of the mercies of this life, and yet in whose heart there was a longing for something. I know He serves her, but He serves God. He tells this woman that the Father is seeking hearts that will overflow in worship to Him; that the desire of the Father is that He should receive worship,
{9}
and worship is the overflow of the heart; and He is there to gratify and serve God. And so he says to the disciples (who say, “Master, eat”), “I have meat to eat that ye know not of. My meat is to do the will of Him that sent Me.” And the will of Him that sent Him was that that woman’s heart should be so satisfied with the knowledge of God that she should be a worshipper.
So we follow Him on in that devoted pathway as a bondman -- taking a bondman’s form. He could say to His own “I must work the works of Him that sent Me, while it is day.” (@John 9: 4.) “I must work the works of Him that sent Me.” The whole history of the Gospels might be gathered up in that word -- “working the works of Him that sent Me while it is day.”
Then, dear brethren, on the Mount of Transfiguration, we can see Him having done what the twenty-first chapter of Exodus indicates. He has served for six years. “Six,” in Scripture, represents what belongs to man. “Six days shalt thou work.” That is man’s period. The seventh day is God’s, but the six are man’s. The Lord Jesus had fulfilled perfectly His service as man to God. He was entitled to go out free. He was entitled to be liberated from the bondman’s position which He had taken. The word from heaven confirms it “This is My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased,” indicating that His service had been of such
{10}
a character as to entirely satisfy His Master. He was entitled to liberty. But Moses and Elias are there, and they are speaking of His decease which He should accomplish at Jerusalem. In Old Testament language, they are speaking of the moment when His ear should be bored, when, instead of going out free. He should suffer, and accept the place of service for ever; in other words, He should retain the bondman’s form instead of going out free.
Then we follow His blessed footsteps, still committed to the will of God, and at Gethsemane we see the intensity of His devotedness to God’s will. We see how committed He was as God’s Bondman, God’s Servant. He stands there and looks into the cup that is there. He looks into the contents of the cup, which is to be drunk. He shrinks from it in all the blessed perfection of His holy Person. Nevertheless, He says: “Not My will, but Thine, be done.” He became obedient; He Whose right it was, as in the form of God, to command, became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross (@Philippians 2: 8).
He moves on from that scene to Calvary. “Thou hast brought me to the dust of death.” (@Psalm 22: 15). He accepts death in obedience to God’s will. He said Himself, that no man taketh His life from Him: No man taketh it from Me, he says. I have
{11}
-- not exactly *power*, although He had that -- but I have *authority*, to lay it down, and I have authority to take it again. This commandment have I received of My Father (@John 10: 18.) He received a commandment, the most wonderful commandment that has ever been issued from the throne of God, that that blessed life He had here on earth should be laid down by God’s will. He said, “I have authority to lay it down, and to take it again.” He came up out of the grave by the commandment of God. He took His life as man again (not in flesh and blood, but still man), by the commandment of His Father.
On the cross He is still committed to the service of God. One sees Him serving the thief. How blessedly He served him at that moment! But He served God, too. He sees in that repentant man a plant for the paradise of God. He sees an addition to that blessed paradise which will minister to the heart of God eternally. He serves God in securing it. “This day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise” -- not the paradise of the thief, but the Paradise of God, the place where God’s pleasure is ministered to for ever. The Lord Jesus is still serving, in all the agony and suffering of the cross, committed to the will of God.
And so He comes up out of the grave by God’s commandment, retaining His place as Man, retaining, too, the bondman’s form.
{12}
He is carried up into heaven, still to serve God. As Hebrews says: “We have a great High Priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus, the Son of God.” (@Hebrews 4: 14). He has gone there to serve God. “A Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.” (@Hebrews 8: 2). Not into holy places made with hands, but into heaven itself, has this High Priest gone, to serve God, and in serving God He serves us. “There to appear in the presence of God for us.” One feels how little we consider His wondrous service there. “Who also intercedes for us,” says the Apostle Paul. He is there as representing us, to appear there for us, to intercede for us, to present, in the very presence of God the much incense to give efficacy to the prayers of all saints at the golden altar. He is there in service to God, and in service to us. Think of His service now! It says: “The God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep.” (@Hebrews 13: 20). He is still a Shepherd, though brought again from the dead. On earth He said: “I am the good Shepherd.” The God of peace brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep. He is in heaven as a Shepherd and Bishop of our souls; not now limited to a place on earth, as in Palestine, but in the presence of God. He is there
{13}
exercising His shepherd service and His bishopric. One delights to think of Him as the Bishop. Men have their bishops, and archbishops, but there is a “bishop of our souls,” active in service, so that the flock of God may be ministered to. Those who take the place in some feeble way of shepherds and bishops may fail, and do fail, in properly caring for the flock, but there is one Shepherd and one Bishop, Whose service is unremitting, and I would appeal to any heart who is turning away from the flock of God -- you will have to turn your back upon the service of the Shepherd and Bishop of your soul. Others may fail to care for you as they should, but *He* will not, and if you go away you go away with your back upon the unfailing service of the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls.
I just pass on to the last Scripture which I read. It says there that “He must reign, until He hath put all enemies under His feet.” (@1 Corinthians 15: 25). Until everything is subdued. The Lord Jesus is coming shortly, and He is going to reign. He is going to set up publicly His kingdom, and going to cast out of His kingdom everything that offends, and all they that do iniquity, and He is going to rule, and rule, and rule, until there is not one thing that lifts itself up against God; until everything is subject to God’s will. And when that wondrous end is secured, when that which
{14}
will not be subject is cast out of the kingdom, and everything that is left in the kingdom is subject to God’s blessed will -- when that end is reached He delivers back, it says, the kingdom. He hands back that kingdom to Him Who is God and Father. Having secured the will of God everywhere, He delivers back the kingdom.
And then we have a word which one fails to take in the greatness and the wonder of. It says that the Son, when everything is subdued unto Him that put everything into subjection to Him, the Son Himself -- not *will become*, but in the New Translation the rendering is that the Son Himself *will be placed*, in subjection to Him Who put all things in subjection to Him, that God may be all in all. That verse brings us to the very door of eternity. It takes us beyond the thousand years of the reign of Christ. It brings us to the door of eternity, where time ceases to be; where time has no place; and the entrance to that eternal scene is marked by this, that God’s will places the Son in subjection. He is placed in subjection, and He accepts that place. As the Scripture in Exodus says, “I love my master, I love my wife, I love my children, I will not go out free.” “And He shall serve Him for ever.” Think of that wondrous moment, when the Lord Jesus lifts brought everything into subjection to God, and He accepts for eternity the place of
{15}
subjection! He accepts it! God places Him there, and He accepts the place of subjection to that will of God, in order that God may be all in all; in order that God’s place in the whole universe might never be disturbed again eternally. His committal to God’s will is such that the Son is placed in subjection. Wonderful it is to think of! Wonderful to think of the footsteps of God’s Servant. As our hearts lay hold of it in its wondrous character, we are stimulated in attachment to Christ, in accepting Him as our Master. The Apostle says “One is your Master, even Christ.” “One is your Master.” In accepting Him as our Master, we are stimulated to serve God in the same blessed spirit, so that we reach that scene of which it is said: “His servants shall serve Him,” and that will go on for eternity.
May the Lord help us, especially the young, to desire, in their appreciation of that blessed Servant of God, that their lives may be afresh dedicated to the service of God. One has enjoyed this, that, as the true David, the Lord would gather up for the House of God everything that is dedicated. David brings in to the House of God everything that is dedicated. Even what a man like Joab dedicated is gathered up! He preserves and values everything that is dedicated. He takes account of what is dedicated. One would desire that each life
{16}
here, in a fresh and living way, may be dedicated to the service of God, under the gracious and blessed influence of God’s Servant.
{17}
THE HOLY CITY
@Genesis 2: 18 - 25; @Acts 7: 54 - 60, 9: 1 - 5; @Revelation 21: 9 - 27, 22: 1 - 6
One is impressed with the importance of the present moment. I do not think there can be anything more important for our souls than to realise what God is doing here. We have, I feel, sometimes read a Scripture, such as the twenty-first and twenty-second of Revelation, and felt a sense of relief that somehow or other God is going to have a wonderful end in relation to His work. We have read about this wonderful City that comes down from God, and we have noted that it is pure gold, that there is not a bit of dross in it, that everything there is perfect, answering to the measurement which God lays upon it. We have thought how blessed that that should be the end, without realising sufficiently that our part in it is just the measure in which we have been subject to the work of the Spirit of God now; that there is nothing going to come out in the future, but what is being formed now; that the Holy City comes down out of Heaven with all the blessed features which we have read of, because the Spirit of God has wrought them in our souls now. This is the meaning of the presence of the Spirit of God here. His work is as great as the work of Christ. We all have rightly a true sense of the exceeding greatness of the work of Christ. Who can compass the immensity of His work on the cross? The foundation of all blessing in eternity rests on it. But another divine Person has come to earth to do another work, and that is to form in our
{18}
souls that which will be for ever for the pleasure of God.
I would like to go over these Scriptures a little in order that we might see how it comes to pass that all the features which are described are true in the City. What I want particularly to impress upon all our hearts is that there is nothing there but what was first in Christ. All the saints of the Christian dispensation, all the work of God in their souls, all put together perfectly, do not present one single thing but was first of all here in the Lord Jesus Christ. Not a single thing additional is there. That is the bearing of @Genesis 2. When Adam opens his eyes after his deep sleep, he sees what God has wrought during his sleep. He sees one formed that came out of himself. He says: “This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.” All that was in Eve, the whole of her being, came out of Adam. She was taken out of the Man; she shall be called Woman. Eve is a divinely given figure of the Church. The word in @Revelation 22 is: “Come hither -- I will show thee the Bride, the Lamb’s wife” (verse 9). She is the true Eve. Everything seen in the Lamb’s wife was first of all in the Lamb. It was first of all in Christ. God could, by His mighty wonderful work, take material out of Adam, and, with that material, He builded the woman. That is what is going on today. This is the period of the sleep of the true, the last, Adam. Publicly the Lord Jesus Christ is not active. He is hidden in the heavens. There is not a single movement on earth publicly of the Lord Jesus, but the Spirit of God is working, taking material from Christ, and using it to build in the souls of God’s people what will be seen in its display as the Bride, the Lamb’s Wife.
{19}
The Lord Jesus is shortly to wake up; He is shortly to begin His activities again in relation to this scene, and, when He does, He presents the Church to Himself a “glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing” (@Ephesians 5: 27), and He sees in it His own blessed features -- nothing whatever there but what was first of all in Him, and He says, in effect: “This time ... she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man” (@Genesis 2: 23). Let us enquire as to how this is going on.
The Gospel of John greatly helps. The Lord says of the Spirit of God: “He shall take of Mine” (@John 16: 15). That is the rib. It is material out of Christ. “And shall shew it unto you.” The effect in us as that goes on is that there is formed in our souls that which corresponds to Christ. The mighty work of the Spirit of God in the hearts of the saints today is to bring before us that which is of Christ, in such a way that it becomes formative in our souls, and the end of which is the Holy City, the Bride, the Lamb’s Wife.
I would like to dwell upon a few of the main features of the Holy City as seen here in Christ. It is not something which has developed apart from Christ. There is nothing going into the City but that which came out of Him. I would like to portray the Holy City moving about in the person of Jesus. Every single thing in the twenty-first and twenty-second of Revelation was all here in the person of Jesus. One cannot touch all the detail, but one would like to deal with a few of the main features of the City.
First of all, we see that the City is the means of the administration of the grace of God -- of all blessing which is in the heart of God. It is administered to men through the City. That City was here in the person of
{20}
Jesus. It was all here. The first feature of it is that it is seen descending out of heaven from God (@Revelation 21: 10). How true that was of the Lord Jesus! Was there ever such a descent as His? Ever such a coming down of what was in heaven, as when the Lord Jesus descended? He says: “I came down from heaven” (@John 6: 38). What a difference from all that came in at the beginning! Satan says: “I will go up,” and man says: “I will go up,” but the Lord Jesus descended. “He that descended” (@Ephesians 4: 10). What a wonderful coming down that was! “I came down from heaven.” How? With the glory of God. He brought into this scene the glory of God -- the outshining of what God is. One would like to read Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John like that, and see that there was in the life of Jesus the blessed outshining of all that God was. Everything which distinguishes God was all shining out in the Lord Jesus. It says: “Her shining was like a most precious stone” (verse 11). What a blessed light it was. Look at that ray -- that blessed ray at the Cross when the Lord said: “Father forgive them” (@Luke 23: 31). What precious light!
Then it says: “Having a wall great and high” (verse 12). That “wall great and high” is seen in the Lord Jesus. If the Church has a wall great and high, it is only because it got it from Christ. If it has the glory of God, it is only because it received it from Christ. If the Church knows how to come down, it is only because it learnt it from Christ. How has the Church a wall great and high? It is for the keeping out of that which is evil, and for the protection of that which is good. How great and high it was in the Person of the Lord Jesus! How the enemy sought to scale that wall. He brought
{21}
against the Lord Jesus every principle of evil which has ever been presented to a human heart. The powers of evil had no access to the Lord Jesus Christ. Later on, other attempts were made to scale that wall. There came to the Lord those who said: “Master, we know that Thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest Thou for any man; for Thou regardest not the person of men” (@Matthew 22: 16). They bring to the Lord the evil principle of flattery, but the Lord, perceiving their evil, says: “Why tempt ye me?” There is no access. They cannot get in with their evil. He is impervious to the principles of evil, whether they be in connection with lust or pride, or on the lines of flattery. Again, Peter is used of Satan to attempt to break down that wall. Peter says “Pity Thyself, Lord.” That is no principle for the Holy City, and the Lord says: “Get thee behind me, Satan.” The wall great and high is there, and Satan cannot get in.
Then we read that the City has twelve gates -- “on the east three gates; on the north three gates; on the south three gates; and on the west three gates” (verse 12). That is what the City has. If the Church has three gates on every side, and is approachable from all points, it is only because she learned how to be so from the Lord Jesus. Just look at all the gates! Always open. There is no night there. “The gates of it shall not be shut at all by day; for there shall be no night there” (verse 25). How blessed that is in the Lord! Always wide open -- the access to the blessed administration of the grace of God. No night ever there! Never closed! One can see how they came from all quarters to the gates when Jesus was here. Just think of those wise men of the east. They come in to the eastern gates, and find the
{22}
Lord Jesus, and the star; the glory of heaven is there, and they find the gates wide open, and they go in and kneel down and worship Him. Look at the north. There is that woman of Tyre and Sidon, who has her daughter tormented with the devil, and she comes up to the gates on the north, and it looks as if they are shut. She cries after him: “Have mercy on me, O Lord, Son of David.” The Lord does not answer her. One would think for a moment that the gates were shut. The Lord says to her afterwards: “Oh, woman, great is thy faith; be it unto thee even as thou wilt.” The northern gates are wide open for her to receive the bounty of that City. The Lord administers from the northern gate to that woman’s soul. On the south side, you can see Zacchaeus coming up from the south. He was prosperous and rich, and he would like to have access to all the bounty of heaven there in the person of Jesus. He gets up into a tree, and the Lord says to him: “Make haste, and come down.” The gates are open, come along in! And look at the west, where the sun sets. The day is closing, but the gates are open. How blessedly the thief found that. The night was beginning to come for his soul, but just as the day ended for him, the western gates are wide open, and the Lord brought him in. It says: “Blessed are they that wash their robes.” That is what happened there. He washed his robe, and entered through the gates of the City, where the tree of life is. On the western side, the gates were not shut. If the City is marked by these features, it is so as receiving them from Christ. He is the source of them.
Then it passes on to speak of the various precious stones in the foundation. The foundation is adorned with all manner of precious stones. This speaks of every divine
{23}
grace, every moral excellence that the City is going to have -- faithfulness, mercy, kindness, compassion, stability, endurance. Every excellence that there is, is all in the foundation of the City. There is no moral excellence, but what shines out first in Christ. If it is faithfulness, He is faithful to death. If it is .mercy, He has it for thousands; and so you can pass on to every moral excellence. They all shine out there.
Another feature is the street of that City. “The street of the City was pure gold, as it were transparent glass” (verse 21). The Church has a street like that, but it received it from Christ. That is where it came from. It is the same street that the Lord was in when He was here. He was only in one street. He never went to any other. He was in one straight path from Bethlehem to the Cross. It says: “Make His path straight” (@Matthew 3: 3). That is the street of the City. Not a single divergence. He says: “I came down from heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of Him that sent me” (@John 6: 38). Every bit of that street is pure gold. You can look where you will, and every step the Lord took was like transparent glass. There was nothing hidden. It was all open and manifest. They came to Him as He was walking down that street, and said: “Who are Thou?” And He said: “Exactly what I say.” What He said and what He did, were exactly the same. John the Baptist greatly rejoiced to see the Lord walking down that golden street. He *stood*. He had never seen such a path before. “John stood, and two of his disciples, and looking upon Jesus as he walked ... “ (@John 1: 35 - 36). There never were such footsteps. Peter speaks of His steps: “Who did no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth” (@1 Peter 2: 22). “We
{24}
should follow in His steps.” If any feature is found in the City in the world to come, the way it came into the City was that the saints appreciated it in Christ.
Another feature is the river -- the river that flowed from the throne of God, and of the Lamb (@Revelation 22: 1) -- a river of water of life flowing out of the throne of God and the Lamb. Cannot you see that blessed river flowing out world-wide when Jesus was here? Wherever there was a soul prepared to bow before the throne of God and the Lamb, it came into contact with that river. See that blessed Man in @John 4 coming near in such grace that not even that woman was afraid. He brings the authority of God home to her soul, and then He says: “If thou knewest the gift of God, and Who it is that saith to thee: ‘Give me to drink,’ thou wouldst have asked of Him, and He would have given Thee living water” (@John 4: 10). The river of water of life flows out from the Throne of God and the Lamb. In the seventh of John, the Lord says: “If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink” (verse 37). Let him come! That is the river of the water of life flowing out of the throne of God and the Lamb. If the Church has that, it only has it because it got it from Christ.
I would like to leave that. I hope we see that the woman was taken out of the man. All that is for the pleasure of Christ -- that help meet for Him -- can only come out of Him.
In the first nine chapters of the Acts, we have the same thing over again. We have in the ninth chapter the Lord, in a sense, waking up out of sleep. He had gone into death, and had disappeared from this world, and was up in heaven, but, in the ninth chapter, we have a kind of rehearsal of the Holy City, and the Lord wakens up and begins to be active again
{25}
in relation to the earth. He looks down from heaven upon earth, and He sees those that love Him, and He identifies them. He says: “This time ... she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.” He does not actually say those words, but as He looks down on the hearts that love Him on earth, He says: “That is *Me*.” He says to Saul: “That is *Me* that you are touching on earth.” It is the Woman. This is the burden of the ministry of the Apostle Paul after that. He received light there as to what the saints were. The Lord identified them. Every feature of the Holy City is in the first nine chapters. It was all here in the beginning of the Acts. It was not in display from heaven as men say, but, morally, it was all here. See them coming down out of heaven, having the glory of God! They were up in the upper room. They were in touch with heaven. In a spiritual sense they had been to heaven. The Spirit of God came down to that upper room, and linked them with heaven. Thus they descended. They descended to men. They descended with the glory of God to where there were people from all parts of the earth gathered together. They brought the light of what God is. It shone “most precious.” Look at that glorious ray of the precious light in the case of Stephen, when he kneeled down and said: “Lay not this sin to their charge.” It was the same light that shone in the Person of Christ shining out in the Holy City in Stephen. It is the glory of God in the City, not now in Christ personally, but in the Holy City here on earth.
Then look at the “wall great and high.” Ananias and Sapphira hurl against that wall the principles of deception, but they cannot get in. They meet a wall great and high. That wall is jasper. As they come up to the
{26}
wall, the whole thing is exposed. They come up to the “wall, great and high.” Simon sought to do the same thing. He gave out that he was some great one, but there is only room for one great One in the Holy City, and that is Christ. Peter says: “Thy money go with thee to perdition.”
Then look at the twelve gates. They are all there. You see them open as Peter preaches to men from all parts of the known world. They say: “Men and brethren, what shall we do?” He says: “Come in through the gates.” “Repent, and be baptised every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.” He brings them in through all these gates open on every side. Afterwards it says Philip went down to Samaria and opened the gates there. Afterwards he opened the gates on the south to the eunuch. The Spirit or God sent Philip to open the gates, and in comes the eunuch. And so you see it all there. The Apostle Paul carries on the idea. There is no night. Ananias brings “Saul brother” in through the gates. He is part of the gates after that. With Paul there is never any night. There was never a time when the gates were closed for him. You see him at Philippi at midnight. The gates are not closed. It is daytime for Paul. The jailor is ushered in through the gates at midnight. So, in the prison, Onesimus turns up, and Paul brings him in. All these things were here when the Church was in its first estate. It could be seen and taken account of. The gates were wide open, and every moral excellence shone out. What precious stones shone in Stephen’s face. It shone as the face of an angel. Look at Peter. He was going to be executed in the morning, but it says he slept. That is
{27}
just like the Lord. Going over the lake the Lord slept. In His confidence in God he was not disturbed. So they all shine out.
Then in regard to that street as it was seen in the first chapters of the Acts; it is a most important street for our souls to be in -- to be walking in always. Peter and John went up together. They were in that street. They “went up together to the temple at the hour of prayer.” You can always go together if you are in that street. That street is quite transparent. In Peter’s soul there is nothing that John cannot see, and in John’s soul there is nothing that Peter cannot see. They go up together, and they can pray together: You can always pray together in the street of that City. The secret of walking together is to be in that street. Paul was there. It is the same street as is spoken of from heaven as the street called Straight. Paul always lived there. Right near his end he said: “We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the Word of God deceitfully” (@2 Corinthians 4: 2). Those are the by-ways of the will of man, and the human heart. The street to be in is the street called Straight -- walking transparently, not walking in craftiness. It is desired that that street should be seen here, and that we should be in it. Not hiding in our hearts certain things. If we do that, then we leave that street. What is normal in Christianity is that all the people of God go up and down that one street called Straight.
Then how the river of water of life flowed out in the beginning of the Acts. How the blessed, life-giving influence of the knowledge of God flowed down first of all into their hearts in the coming of the Spirit, as they were before the throne of God and the Lamb.
{28}
That river flowed first of all into the hearts of the one hundred and twenty, then into all those that came up to Jerusalem who heard the word. Then it flowed down to Samaria, and to Cornelius. Wherever the saints were in the beginning, the river of the water of life was flowing out, and the tree of life was available. How they fed upon it! You can see from his writings that the Apostle Paul fed upon the tree of life, getting fresh impressions of the greatness of the Lord Jesus Christ. Not things that were written two hundred years ago. Not doctrines laid down in writings that we study, but fresh impressions of the greatness of Christ, always. The saints in the early days were living and feeding upon Christ as the Tree of Life, and the leaves they carried to the nations for their healing.
What I want to show is that the Holy City of God is not something that is going to be seen some day in the future, but it was here in the person of Jesus, and in the saints by the work of the Spirit of God. The foundations bear the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb (verse 14). That City which is going to be built upon the foundations of the Apostles is going to love Christ for ever. It is going to be true to Him for eternity. It is going to be the Bride, the Lamb’s wife. Judas could not be in the foundation. He was guide to them that took Jesus. He was not in the foundation. The foundations must be right. So they say: “The Lord knoweth the hearts of all.” They want one chosen for the foundation whose heart is right towards Christ.
One would just like to bring these few thoughts before us, that we might carry in our souls continually the sense of what God is doing. There is undoubtedly a distinct
{29}
return morally to the beginning. That is the burden of the recovery of our day. The Lord is bringing things at the end morally to where they were at the beginning. He is giving the ministry of His Spirit. There is a taking of the things of Christ, and bringing them before our hearts, with a view to this -- that there should be found those who love Him because of what He is Himself, and then, on the other hand, there should be those here to administer the grace of heaven to one another, and to those outside, with a wall “great and high” that refuses the entrance of evil, and yet, with gates that are never shut for the entrance of what is right; with the excellencies of Christ coming out of the precious stones; with their feet set in the golden street that is transparent; and with the river of the water of life (the blessed knowledge of God) being made available through the saints.
May the Lord grant that we might be continually exercised to listen to the voice of Christ, so that, by our appreciation of Him, these things might be in living evidence amongst the people of God, for His Name’s sake.
{30}
LOVERS OF CHRIST
@1 Corinthians 12: 1 - 3; @Hebrews 13: 20, 21; @1 Corinthians 11: 23 - 26; @Acts 7: 54 - 60
I would like, dear brethren, to say a few words tonight in the way of bringing before you the means I believe the Lord Jesus Christ takes with His people in order to secure their affection. I think the Lord is looking today that there should be here on earth those who are characterised as lovers of Christ, I do not mean, dear brethren, simply that we love Him as we first learn to love Him as Saviour, as the Blessed One who died for us. I believe the Lord Jesus is looking today to find here on earth, those who are marked continuously as lovers of Christ. In the epistle to Timothy the apostle tells us that in the last days, difficult times shall come. One feels, dear brethren, that one feature of the difficult times is that men are lovers of their own selves. You could write that upon this world, that men are lovers of themselves, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God, and I believe the Lord is stirring up the hearts of His people, that in contrast to that He should see here those who are lovers of Christ. I believe that we may see from these Scriptures how He works to produce this in our hearts. We might speak of His love to us as individuals. How wonderful it is! The apostle could say, “Who loved *me*,
{31}
and gave Himself for *me*.” That is the love He bears to us individually. We might think of His love to the Church. “He loved the Church and gave Himself for it.” How wondrous, and how blessed!
And in Ephesians, the apostle speaks of “The love of Christ which passeth knowledge.” Here we are brought face to face with the totality of His love. What I want to show is that the Lord looks for an answer to His love. The effect of the appreciation of His love to us as individuals, and to the Church, would be that we should be here as lovers of Christ. You remember, the Lord speaks to the disciples on that last evening in @John 14, “He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth Me! and he that loveth Me shall be loved of My Father, and I will love him, and will manifest Myself to him.” We might perhaps say, “Surely that is true of all?” But does he say it of all? “He that loveth Me shall be loved of My Father.”
In @John 11 we read, “Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus.” He loved all in a sense. His compassions were great to the poor and the wretched, but it says, “He loved Martha, and her sister and Lazarus.” Why? I believe He saw in their hearts that whole-hearted affection for Himself, that was a joy to His heart, and, thank God, I believe He does see something of it now. There are those here who are not lovers
{32}
of themselves, but who are characterised as lovers of Christ. One is struck with that thought in the history of Solomon. You remember Solomon’s purpose to build God a house. It had been in David’s heart to do it, but David was a man of war, and war is not a feature of God’s house. The great features of God’s house are peace and prayer. “My house shall be called a house of prayer.” Peace and prayer go together. So David could not build the house. Solomon was a man of peace. He takes up David’s thought, and intends to build God a house. Now the question arises, where is the suitable material to come from to build God a house? We see how beautifully it comes out. Hiram, King of Tyre, “was ever a lover of David,” Solomon seems to have divine wisdom as to him. He sent for that man so as to have durable materials for the house. And we read, “Hiram greatly rejoiced.” Because of his love for David he delighted to send material. So he sent Solomon timber of cedar, and timber of fir. He sent his servants into the forests to hew material suitable for the Temple of God. It was provided by one who was called ever a lover of David. Hiram’s compensation comes in a most beautiful way. Solomon gave Hiram 20,000 measures of wheat for food, and 20 measures of pure oil. There came from the heart of Hiram, because of the love he bore to David, material suitable for God’s dwelling place. He got in return, food, and that which would make
{33}
his face shine. Oil makes a man’s face to shine. But what has struck one particularly is this, that when material was necessary for God’s house, the one who provided it is called ever a lover of David. I’m sure it’s true the Lord finds from those who love Him, material suitable for the house of God. But there is a difference, for in our case the one who loves becomes the material. “To whom coming, as unto a Living Stone ... ye also as living stones are built up a spiritual house.” The materials for God’s house today are not literal timbers of cedar and fir. *But ye also*. The one who loves Christ is suitable material for that house, “In Whom all the building fitly framed together ... . In Whom ye also are builded together.”
Ah! it is fitly framed together, you cannot conceive of disorder in a structure composed of lovers of Christ. It is fitly framed together and groweth. I thought the four Scriptures I read might be used to create this condition of heart. I am not referring to the first time He meets us. But in these Scriptures there is that calculated to move our affections, so that if we listen we become lovers of Christ. In @1 Corinthians 12, the apostle tells us, “No man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed.” No one upon whom the Spirit is operating will speak detrimentally of Christ. No one who is going to have a place in the divine structure, hates Christ. That
{34}
belongs to another structure altogether, to that of the prince of the power of the air. He works in the children of disobedience, in order to produce a structure in this world where he can dwell. When the Lord spoke to the Church at Pergamos He said, “I know where thou dwellest, even where Satan’s seat is.” We know that the spirit of the world is hatred of Christ. It is growing too, we see it in spite of fair words. It is the governing spirit. Satan hates Christ. The apostle says, I would not have you ignorant that no man speaking by the Spirit can curse Jesus Christ. But mind you, he adds, “No man can say that Jesus Christ is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.” No one can say Lord Jesus except by the Spirit of God. It has been pointed out that the expression *Lord Jesus*, is an expression of affection of heart. What is before the heart in giving expression to those blessed words is not the dignity of Christ exactly, not His official glory, but the breathing of our heart. And the apostle says no one can say Lord Jesus but by the Holy Spirit. And the Spirit of God is here. How different from the spirit of Satan. The Spirit of God is operating in the children of light, in order to produce a blessed response to His love, and to bind the hearts of those who love Him to Himself. May the Spirit work in our souls, dear brethren, so that the Lord Jesus may engage our affections absolutely. That is what the Spirit is doing today. He is here. His work is great, it is
{35}
immense. The Spirit maketh intercession for us. The mighty work of the Spirit is going on all the time here on earth, to form in the saints, affections that will answer to Christ, and so the apostle says, no man can say “Lord Jesus,” except by the Spirit of God. It is the work of the Spirit to bind our hearts to Him.
Then, dear friends, in the Scriptures we read in Hebrews, I think we have one of the means the Spirit uses to bring about that end. The Spirit takes of the things of Christ, and shows them to us. And so the writer of the epistle to the Hebrews, writes to the saints of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the character of Shepherd, that Great Shepherd of the sheep. He is thinking of all the blessed Lord’s activities as the Great Shepherd, who has given His life for the sheep. Think of the activities of the Lord Jesus in that character. There was nothing of the hireling about Him. What a contrast to the wolf who comes to destroy and scatter the sheep. The hireling flees, but the Lord Jesus is the Good Shepherd who giveth His life for the sheep. He went down into death itself for the sheep. And the writer thinks of this. He is so delighted in that Great Shepherd of the sheep, that he says, “The God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that Great Shepherd of the sheep,” as he thinks of Him in that character he says “*our* Lord Jesus.” How our hearts are moved as we think of that Great
{36}
Shepherd, our Lord Jesus? God brought Him again from the dead, that Great Shepherd of the sheep. He’s not lost to us, beloved friends.
We see a line of shepherds running down from the earliest times. We find Abel was a keeper of sheep. Then again Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were shepherds. You remember when Joseph’s brethren came before Pharaoh, he said, “What is your occupation?” They answered, “Thy servants are shepherds.” Further on, the line was continued in Moses. He was a keeper of sheep in the wilderness. The line goes on to David. God took him from the sheepfold to shepherd His people. He guided them in the way of integrity. Later we get the shepherds who watched their flocks on the night the Lord Jesus was about to come. Those watching shepherds stand for the whole line of faithful shepherds who went before. They were to see One who was to be the Great Shepherd of the sheep. The shepherd character is taken up again in Peter. The Lord Jesus said to him, “Feed My sheep. Feed My lambs.” The apostle Paul said, “After my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.” They dare not come while he was there, he was such a faithful shepherd.
Timothy takes up the line. “I have no man like-minded who will naturally care for your state.” Timothy had the shepherd heart.
Beloved brethren, we need more of the shepherd heart. One would be greatly encouraged
{37}
to go on that line. When that Great Shepherd was down in death, in His activities as a Shepherd, God would not allow Him to remain there. All the other shepherds we were speaking about had fallen asleep. But God brought again from the dead the Great Shepherd, and the Spirit of God would engage us with the shepherd activities of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Spirit of God would bring Him before us in that way. When our affections are moved we can say, “Our Lord Jesus.” Before one leaves that point, it is very blessed to see that God has the heart of a shepherd. God spoke of “David, My servant, a man after Mine own heart.” What kind of a heart had David? A shepherd heart. God said, ‘He’s got a heart like Mine.’ Think of it. God, in all His majesty and glory, has the heart of a shepherd. The Man after God’s own heart, dear brethren, is only to be seen perfectly in the Lord Jesus, but in David’s heart we have a reflection of the heart of God.
In coming to @1 Corinthians 11, one feels that the Lord Jesus is presented there in such a way as to gain lovers of Christ, to secure now on the earth, lovers of Christ. I think we’ll agree that there is nothing like the Supper to gain lovers of Christ. Paul, about to speak to the saints at Corinth, of that blessed institution, says, “The Lord Jesus the same night in which He was betrayed.” That same night, the night, if any, that might have turned
{38}
His thoughts from His own, that same night He took bread, “And when He had given thanks, He brake it and said, Take, eat, this is My body, which is given for you.” As the Lord speaks to us in the Supper, our affections are moved, are renewed. I believe the affections of the saints grow through the Supper, as He speaks of His love in such a wondrous way. In @Exodus 21, we have the instance of the Hebrew servant. After six years¬ service he could go free. If he came in by himself, he should go out by himself. If he brought a wife in with him, she should go out with him. As the margin reads, if he came in with his body, he shall go out with his body. But if he shall say, “I love my master, my wife, and my children, I will not go out free,” then his master will bring him to the judges, they will bore his ear with an awl at the doorpost, and he shall serve him for ever. You can understand, dear friends, that as the Hebrew servant would be gathered from time to time with his wife and children, they would look often at that mark in his ear. Their hearts would be moved. They would understand he had had the opportunity and the right to go out free, but he loved them. “I love my master, my wife, and my children.” Dear friends, I think that’s what the Lord Jesus says to us in the Supper. He says, “This is My body.” It was the body prepared for Him, and which He need never have given up. He had never forfeited the right to live, and as Christians
{39}
our bodies are the Lord’s. “This is My body.” He could have taken it with Him. He came in with His body, in the words of the type, and He could have gone out with His body as far as His personal title was concerned, but in the Supper He says plainly, “I will not go free.” The apostle says, “The Lord Jesus, the same night in which He was betrayed ... , said This Is My body.” The apostle’s whole heart goes out with his words. “The Lord Jesus, the same night.” “This Is My body, which is given for you.” I’m sure, dear brethren, that the Lord is using the Supper to create on this earth myriads of lovers of Christ, who are thus made into suitable material for that structure which is growing into an holy habitation for the Lord.
Just a few words as to @Acts 7. Here we have a different point of view. We see Stephen about to depart from this world. Here we are not thinking of the Lord Jesus Christ as the Great Shepherd, nor of the Supper. But we find a man who says, “I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God.” He looked up into the heavens. The heavens are spoken of in Scripture as a curtain which hides from the natural eye the other side, the dwelling-place of God. Oh, think of that dwelling-place in the heavens! But Stephen saw the heavens opened. He saw the glory of God and Jesus. He saw in the Person of Jesus, all the glory of God shining
{40}
for him, and his heart was enchanted. He was so taken up with the wondrous vision that, though the stones were flying, he was outside of it all, and knelt down and said, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.” As he looked at that wondrous scene, his heart beheld Christ, and he said “Lord Jesus.” He is another example of a man like Hiram. He went out of *this* world governed by the spirit of *that* world. He went up from the wilderness leaning on his Beloved, leaning upon Christ, and he said, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.” He thus qualified to become material for God’s dwelling-place. What excellent material! It is not lost. It has gone into that wonderful structure that will come into display for the glory of God and the great blessing of man. So Stephen has gone there. He was ever a lover of Christ.
Well, beloved friends, that, I believe, is the way God is working to produce in our hearts material for His house. As Peter wrote, “Ye also, as living stones, are built upon a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ.” And as that work goes on, and it is going on, it prepares us for that blessed close of the Scriptures when the Lord speaks to His own, “He that testifieth these things, saith, Surely I come quickly.” The Spirit of God will so work in the hearts of His people that there will arise from myriads of hearts the blessed response, “Even so, come Lord Jesus.” I am
{41}
sure that is what the Spirit of God is doing. He is working to produce that here. The Lord takes account of every move in the soul. He takes account of every living thing. If there is a desire to answer to His love, the Lord satisfies it by the power of the Spirit of God.
{42}
THE PERSON OF CHRIST
@Colossians 1: 12 - 22; @Colossians 2: 1; @Colossians 4: 16
I think that the people of God are being made to feel -- perhaps more definitely now than ever before that the great point before the Spirit of God is to attach the hearts of His people to Christ. This is not a day when we hear very much about doctrine, although doctrine is important indeed, but the conflict that raged about right doctrine and truth has been fought, and the position to some extent at least has been established. The great issue of the present moment is the place the blessed Lord Jesus Christ personally has in our hearts. The public condition of the assembly at the close of its history here is marked by this solemn fact, that the assembly publicly in Laodicea is indifferent to the person of Christ; that He is outside. It is true that in infinite grace He is outside *knocking*. Nevertheless, He is *outside*, and the Lord says to the assembly of Laodicea: “Because thou art lukewarm (that is, indifferent) I will spue thee out of my mouth.” (@Revelation 3: 16). It is true that that assembly says: “I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing.” Dear brethren, we have to beware that we are not satisfied with *goods*. The Lord Jesus is not satisfied with goods. We might have accumulated a good deal of intelligence as to the things of God; we might have at our hand what is correct and formal; we might have correct gatherings, correct forms, and be ever so careful about them, and it might be all *goods* -- simply that which we have accumulated -- and the Lord
{43}
Jesus Christ personally have no place in our hearts.
The Lord is not content with anything less than being *inside* the affections of His people. I am sure Scripture, and the public condition of the assembly, confirm the thought that what we each have to overcome in the present moment is a Laodicean state. One has enjoyed seeing how the Lord, in His grace and His tender solicitude for His people, provides *that*, from time to time, which will forestall the activities of evil. The Lord, in His great shepherd care, so safeguards His people, both collectively and individually, that He provides that which, if heeded, if taken account of, will preserve us from a danger which He sees is coming upon us. How beautifully that is illustrated in the case of Abraham. Abraham had gone with his company, and rescued his brother Lot, and the king of Sodom and all the goods that belonged to him, and it says in the book of Genesis that the king of Sodom went out to meet Abraham after he returned from the slaughter of the kings. The king of Sodom went to meet him, and, at that moment, it says Melchisedec came and “brought forth bread and wine,” and blessed Abraham, and said: “Blessed be Abram, of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth.” Then the king of Sodom comes and says to Abraham: “You take the goods,” and Abraham says: “I have lift up my hand to the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth.” You see how the Lord anticipated what Abraham would have to face. The king of Sodom offered him all the goods he had saved from the hands of the kings, but the Lord came in through Melchisedec to tell Abraham about the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth, and Abraham takes up that in faith in his soul, and says: “I will not
{44}
have from a thread to a shoe latchet. I am in touch with the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth.” What tender consideration was in that for the danger that Abraham was in. The Lord knew what was coming, and He anticipated it with ministry that would safeguard Abraham. One is confident that the same has been true ever since. In our individual paths how often it is true. For anything that is before us God gives ministry, light, that is salvation if we heed it, in view of what He knows is coming in amongst His people.
I feel that that is just the position in this epistle to the Colossians. There is no doubt it had a direct bearing upon the assembly at Colosse. There was a condition existing there which needed this epistle to protect and help and deliver the Colossian brethren from dangers that were coming in there. Also, it is clear from the Scripture, that the Lord, and the Spirit of God, and the Apostle Paul had, even in that early day, some anxiety about Laodicea. Long before the Lord spoke or sent His epistle in the Revelation, Paul says: “I would have you know what conflict I have for them at Laodicea” (@Colossians 2: 1), ‘I am in distress, in conflict, for the Laodicean brethren’. He does not tell us what led him to it. At the end of his epistle he says: “Cause that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans.” (@Colossians 4: 16.) ‘There is something in this epistle,’ says the Apostle, ‘that the Laodicean brethren need; there is danger ahead for Laodicea, so cause that this epistle be read to the assembly of Laodicea.’
I would like to show in a few words that this epistle to the Colossians provides that for us which, if heeded, will preserve us from ever becoming Laodicean in character, and
{45}
indeed, one trusts that, if we are already marked by a Laodicean spirit, the epistle, if heeded now, in conjunction with the Lord’s own word in the Revelation, will effect for us deliverance from a Laodicean state. As we have said, what marks the assembly at Laodicea (which is the closing phase of the Church’s history publicly) is indifference to Christ personally, and He is outside. If this blessed and wondrous epistle to the Colossians had been heeded when it was read (as the Apostle says it should be), a position could never have arisen in Laodicea where the Lord Jesus Christ was outside that assembly.
I would like to touch a little upon the detail that the Apostle by the Spirit gives as to Who it is that is outside. In the epistle to Laodicea, the Lord says: “Behold, *I* stand at the door.” This epistle develops before our hearts and minds who that “I” is. ‘Behold, *I* am outside.’ They had already read this epistle, and we are to take account of this epistle in order that we should be saved from ever being in the condition that leaves the Lord Jesus Christ personally outside.
The first remark we read, which the Apostle has to make about the Lord personally, is this, that He is “the Son of the Father’s love.” “Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light; Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and bath translated us into the kingdom of His dear Son,” or “the Son of His love.” (@Colossians 1: 12 - 13.) That is the first word as to the Lord personally. He is the Son of the Father’s love. He is the One that the Father loves. It is said in the Gospels: “This is My beloved Son.” Think of the One whom the Father loves, and into Whose hands He
{46}
has given everything *and we, indifferent to Him, having no room for Him, keeping Him outside, knocking*! He is the One whom the Father loves, and if the Father loves Him, surely the corollary must be that everyone should love Him. The Father loves the Son, and that blessed One whom the Father loves says to Laodicea: “Behold! I stand at the door and knock.”
Then the Apostle moves on, and says: “In whom we have redemption through His blood, even, the forgiveness of sins.” (verse 14.) This is another development of the word “I.” (“Behold! *I* stand ... “) “In whom we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins.” (verse 14.) The Redeemer, the blessed Redeemer, is brought before us -- the One who, through His blood, has picked us up in Egypt, with all its slavery, with all its darkness, with its rivers that stank, with its frogs, and lice, and hail, and with its death; the One who came into that scene, and by His precious death redeemed us from Egypt, and brought us out of it, and in doing that cleared away our sins from before God. *And we are indifferent to Him*! *He is outside*! If we read that Scripture with our hearts, how utterly impossible that our Redeemer should be outside, knocking.
Then we read: “Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.” (verse 15.) It is still the unfolding by the Spirit of the One whom Laodicea needed. “Cause it to be read in the church of the Laodiceans.” “Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.” The One we were speaking of together last night, the One who is God’s perfect representative in the universe, as having become Man, He is the image of the
{47}
invisible God. He represents God. Therefore He is the firstborn of all creation. He takes the place of the Head of the whole creation as God’s representative, *and we are lukewarm with regard to Him*! Can it be, that we do not care what place God’s representative has in our hearts? Think of the profound grace of Christ, God’s representative, knocking at our hearts. “Behold, I stand at the door, and am knocking; if any man hear My voice, and open the door, I will come in to him.” What He knocks at, dear brethren, is our hearts. It says of Lydia, “Whose heart the Lord opened.” That is what He is knocking at. He would open all our hearts, so that if the church publicly leaves Him out, you and I will not leave Him out -- whether locally, as privileged to come together in the light of what is true of the whole assembly, or individually, for “If any man hear My voice and open the door, I will come in to him.” He is “the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.”
So it goes on, “For by Him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things were created by Him and for Him; and He is before all things, and by Him, all things consist.” (verses 16 and 17.) The Apostle moves on another step in the unfolding of that which Colosse, on the one hand, and Laodicea, on the other, needed. He now brings before us this glory. Just think of that! How utterly we are unable to take it in, that the Lord Jesus Christ, personally, is the Creator of the universe. There are the things in heavens, the visible things. Think of the glory of the sun as it rises and makes its heat felt in every part. The Lord Jesus Christ personally made that. And the
{48}
moon and the stars of light He made. They were made by Him and for Him. And then there are the invisible things in heaven, the thrones, and principalities, and powers, and mights, and dominions. There are Gabriel, and Michael, and the innumerable company of angels, excelling in strength, all made by Him, and for Him, for His service. He could have asked, and He would have had, immediately, more than twelve legions of angels. There were more than twelve legions waiting to immediately answer His word, if He asked, because they were made by Him and for Him.
Then if we come down to the things on earth, everything here is His handiwork. The seas, and mountains, and rivers, and trees, and man, (think of the wonderful wisdom that is, expressed in man!) were all made by Him and for Him. Then think of the epistle to Laodicea -- that such an one as the blessed Creator, the Creator Who is blessed for ever, should be outside the affections of the assembly -- *that we are indifferent and lukewarm in regard to the blessed Creator*! And that He, on the other hand, in infinite grace, should stand at our hearts knocking! What a wondrous thing!
And it goes on, “He is the Head of the body, the assembly.” (verse 18.) Another glory! “The Head of the body, the assembly.” What a wonderful vessel the body is. The body, dear brethren, is here composed of all believers in Christ, who have the Spirit of God. “By one Spirit baptized into one body.” And that body is here on earth to express the character of Christ. That is the thought of the body. It is in our bodies that we are expressed. The personality lies behind everyone, but the body is the vehicle by which what we are is expressed. There is a
{49}
wonderful vessel on earth for the expression of Christ. How we can see it if our minds go back to the early days? We look at a man like Stephen. We see his face shine with the light of heaven. We see him kneel down, as the stones batter his body, and we hear his prayer, “Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.” We say, “What a marvellous, wonderful sight.” And we think of a man like Peter, there in prison with two soldiers at his side, and the immediate prospect of death, and we go in and see Peter there, asleep between the two soldiers. We say, “What a wonderful thing.” But, dear brethren, Christ is the Head of the body, and that which we so marvel at in Stephen, was derived from the Head. Stephen was one member of the body, and He is the Head of the body. That which the delight in in Peter sleeping there between two soldiers, condemned, was derived from the Head of the body. The Lord Jesus, when He was here, expressed that blessed prayer, “Father, forgive them,” and Stephen derived the thoughts of his heart from Christ. And the Lord Jesus, as the storms and the waves and the tempest rolled about Him, was asleep in the hinder part of the ship, undisturbed by the hatred and malice of Satan, asleep in confidence in God. Peter learnt how to do that, from Christ. It was not instinct in Peter and Stephen. It was derived from the Head of the body. What a wonderful person the Head of the body must be, when every single expression of Christ that has ever been given in this scene, from Pentecost until now, was derived from the Lord Jesus Christ. So it says, “He is the Head of the body, the assembly.” That is another thought, the assembly. What a wondrous thought that is! What honour and dignity men give to man’s
{50}
assemblies. You take an assembly in any country, what dignity is associated with the thought that men are members of that assembly. But what of God’s assembly? God’s assembly, in which, it says, may be seen now that “unto the principalities and powers in the heavenlies might be made known in the assembly, the all-various wisdom of God.” In man’s assemblies there is the all-various wisdom that man has, but in God’s assembly, there is the “all-various wisdom of God.” Every bit of true wisdom that ever was expressed here since Pentecost is found in God’s assembly, and He is the Head of the body, the assembly, and all the wisdom, divine wisdom, that was ever in the church, came from its Head, which is Christ. Think how the Apostle longed, in his conflict, that the brethren in Laodicea should read this, and be preserved from ever being indifferent to Christ -- be preserved from ever having that wondrous blessed Person outside their hearts, knocking. “Cause it to be read to the church of the Laodiceans.”
And we read further, “Who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things He might have the pre-eminence.” (verse 18.) We cannot touch all these details; but think of that word, “the firstborn from the dead.” Mr. Raven said that, “One man out of death, was greater than a world of dead men.” One man out of death; and He is that blessed Man Who has the keys of death and of Hades -- the first to rise from the dead, and to rise because of what was inherent in His own person. He said to Martha, “I am the Resurrection.” It is not a question of the last day; the Resurrection is here, in Him. He says, “I am It.” Think of a man out of death. How everybody else fades away in oblivion, as we think of
{51}
the one Man out of death, with the keys of death in His hand. The Apostle says, “Cause it to be read to the Laodiceans.” *And our hearts are cold, lukewarm, towards the first begotten from the dead*. Think of such an One as He, knocking at our hearts, and finding no response! Oh, dear brethren, this epistle would save us from such a state. “The firstborn from the dead, that in all things He might have the pre-eminence.” How the One Who controls death, must inevitably be first in everything!
Further, it says, “For it pleased the Father that in Him should all fulness dwell.” (verse 19.) One feels that our tiny appreciation of. Christ cannot take in such a word. It was pleasing, that in Him should all fulness dwell, that all fulness should have its permanent abode in Christ. That was what was pleasing. In respect of every other man, God is the God of measure. He measures out to each one of us, just as much as we can contain of Himself, and, so as we look back over the past of the people of God, we see how one and another had a measure of things expressed and contained in them. The Scripture speaks of “righteous” Abel. Evidently that was the great feature of Abel. He was “righteous” Abel. In his vessel, there was measured something of righteousness. He contained something of it. And Abraham is spoken of, as “faithful” Abraham. He was a man of faith. God put into that vessel, faith in measure. He measured it. It says in Romans, that God has given to every one a measure of faith. He has measured out as much light, as to Himself, as we can hold. We think of Moses; the distinctive feature of that vessel was meekness. He was the meekest man in all the earth. He contained in his vessel, a measure of meekness. We
{52}
think of Solomon. We hear of the wisdom of Solomon. The Queen of Sheba came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon. In respect of Job, it says, “Ye have heard of the patience of Job.”
God is pleased to put into each one of our vessels, as much as we can contain, but, when we come to Christ, He was pleased that in Him should all fulness dwell. The whole totality of everything that was of God, abides for ever in Christ. There is nothing measured. How often, in our prayers, we speak in measure. I say “in measure” because we are conscious that everything we have is in measure. But it was pleasing, that in Him, should all fulness dwell. Righteousness, the totality of righteousness, was in Christ. Faithfulness is there in its completeness. Meekness, everything that can be expressed as to meekness, dwells in Him. Wisdom, it is all there; He is the wisdom of God. Patience, the patience of Christ, is there completely. And so everything that you can think of, that is true in God, every one of those excellencies, finds its full, complete, and entire expression in Christ. All the excellencies of the Godhead, dwell in that blessed Person completely. *And do we not care what place He has got in our hearts? Are we content for Him to knock in vain*? God forbid that that wonderful Person, in Whom it was pleasing that all fulness should dwell, should stand at our hearts and say “I am knocking,” and we not to open. That is the condition of Laodicea. But the Apostle, with a spiritual eye, seeing what was coming, says, “Cause this to be read to the church of the Laodiceans,” heeding which, they would have been saved from what the Lord has to say about them in *His* letter. “And having made peace through the blood
{53}
of the cross, by Him to reconcile all things unto Himself; by Him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven. And you that were sometime alienated, and enemies in your mind, by wicked works, yet now hath He reconciled in the body of His flesh through death, to present you holy and unblamable and unreproveable in His sight.” (verses 20 - 22.) We have now, before us, another glory of Christ. The Apostle would bring before the Colossians and Laodiceans, that He is the One Who brings in reconciliation of everything in heaven and on earth; the One Who has come in, to take out of heaven and earth, every trace of alienation towards God. He is going to put out of the moral universe everything that is irreconcilable, and is going to bring in a heaven and earth completely in accord with the heart of God. In the meantime he says, “And you, that were sometime alienated, and enemies in your mind, by wicked works, yet now hath He reconciled in the body of His flesh through death.” You and I, individually in the meantime, anticipating the day when everything in heaven and on earth will be in accord with God, through the work of Christ, have had taken out of our hearts, the alienation and the enmity, and we have been brought to God. The distance, and the fear and hatred that were once in our hearts towards God, have been taken away by Him. How our hearts should draw to Him in that connection. How sad that One Who has brought in reconciliation should have to say “Behold, I stand at the door, and am knocking.” One feels, in the light of these things, that if the Laodicean assembly had really read them with their hearts, they could never have reached the condition that the Lord has to speak of as true of them, in the Revelation.
{54}
God grant that everyone of us may be preserved in devoted allegiance and affection to Christ. It is as we lay hold, in our hearts, upon the unfolding of His infinite glory, so that He is more to us than anything the enemy can ever present, that we shall be preserved.
{55}
THE PRE-EMINENCE OF CHRIST
@Colossians 1: 5 - 18
“And He is the head of the body, the Church; who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things He might have the pre-eminence.”
One would desire, dear friends, that what is said of Isaac might be true in a distinct and definite way tonight of every heart in this room.
It is said of Isaac that he “waxed great, and went forward and grew until he became very great.” (@Genesis 26: 13.)
One would desire that the experience of our hearts continually should be that the Lord Jesus Christ should wax greater and greater in the vision of our souls. Not that He Himself personally could ever be greater than He was at Bethlehem. He, Himself, as to His own inherent greatness, “is the same yesterday, today and forever”; but in our apprehension of His greatness one would like that Scripture to be true with every heart, “that he waxed greater and greater until he became very great.” The wise men of the East knew that the blessed Person Who had entered this world from Heaven had all greatness in Him, so that they came to where the little Child was, and kneeled down and worshipped Him. They said in effect what David says, as they kneeled down with a conscious sense of the greatness of Christ, “Thine, O Lord, is the greatness and the power and the glory, and the victory; and
{56}
the majesty ... and Thou art exalted as Head over all.” (@1 Chronicles 29: 11.) They said that in their hearts, as they knelt down in the presence of the Lord Jesus as a little child.
Upon the Cross the thief said exactly the same thing in his heart, in the midst of the utmost humiliation and dishonour. The thief discerned that all the greatness was there, and he, also, said, ‘Thine, O Lord, is the greatness and the majesty,’ but one feels that we come to these things step by step, little by little. How one would prize one single thought in the heart of the greatness and the glory of Christ.
All spiritual movement, all growth and knowledge of God, springs from a conception of Christ. It does not spring from a mental ability to analyse the truths of Scripture. It springs from an apprehension in the affections of the majesty and glory of Christ, and it is on this line, dear friends, I would like to take up this passage where the Apostle says “that in all things He might have the pre-eminence.” The new translation of it is the same in effect, but perhaps clearer -- “that in everything He might have the first place.” That that glorious One Whom we know as our Saviour might in everything, in every sphere of activity that it is ours to touch, might stand there first, and that we might rank behind Him. It speaks in Chronicles (@1 Chronicles 12: 23) of how David received fifty thousand men who could keep rank, and it tells us why they could keep rank. They were not of a double heart. Every one of this fifty thousand men loved David, and he was at the head of them. They kept rank. That is the secret, dear brethren, of being in fellowship. The secret of being in fellowship is that we have not two hearts -- one heart to love Christ, and the other heart to seek our own
{57}
will -- and so it says they kept rank, every one of them.
Now this passage in Colossians indicates that *we* have a place. While the Lord Jesus Christ has the *first* place it implies that we have got a place. I would like to show that in everything that has to do with God and His interests that we have the privilege to have part in, the Lord Jesus Christ, as Man, takes the lead there. He steps into the front; He is first.
The first thing I would speak of is what is general. Every creature of God can have part in one thing. There is one thing true for everything, and that is, it is open to all to *serve* God. The inanimate creation serves Him. David says: “The heavens declare the glory of God.”
Anyone who has any experience with God knows that everything was made to serve God, and so it is open, dear brethren, for us to serve God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, as man, steps into the front rank. He steps out right ahead of everybody, and He has the pre-eminence.
It is only said of *Him*, “Behold My Servant.” (@Isaiah 42: 1.) God says from Heaven, through the prophet Isaiah, ‘Just look at My Servant.’ That is the secret, dear brethren, of all service for God -- “Behold My Servant.” What a Servant He was. The apostles are greatly impressed by it. In their prayer they speak of “Thy holy Servant, Jesus.” Oh, what a sense they had in their hearts of how He was down here ministering to the will of God. That service was no legal service. He said, “Oh, how I love Thy law, and in it I meditate day and night.” “I delight,” says the Lord Jesus, “to do Thy will, O My God; yea. Thy law is within My heart.” So the Lord Jesus trod this world
{58}
as God’s Servant, serving Him from the heart, serving Him, dear brethren, even to death, as we see in the Garden. The Lord Jesus says, “Not My will.” “Not My will!” He says, ‘I love My Master, I love Him.’ In becoming man the Lord Jesus took the servant’s place. “Taking a bondman’s form,” Scripture says; and in that place how He served! He says, “I love My Master,” and He served God right into death itself, doing His will. He was obedient, as says the Word, “Obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.” Untiring in His ministrations all through His journey. Serving, too. His own. He says to them, “I (your Lord and Master) am among you as One that serves.” How He served them in stooping down to wash their feet. Serving them, too, in every way; and now, dear brethren, He has gone up into Heaven and what is He doing there? Serving God there. It says, first of all, He was carried up into Heaven and sat on the right hand of God, and the disciples went everywhere, the Lord working with them, working still from there, still working as the blessed Servant of God, and He is going on with that service until He has put down all rule and authority. When everything that lifts itself up against God is dealt with by God’s Servant what does He say then? ‘I will serve Him for ever.’ When that eternal day comes, right at the commencement of it, this is what is said, “The Son Himself will become subject” (the servant’s place) “will become subject to Him Who has put all things in subjection to Him, that God may be all in all.”
Now, dear brethren we are to rank behind that glorious Servant. Whatever branch of Service we may look at, He is the Servant Who is in the lead, He has got the first place.
{59}
We cannot serve -- our service will not be worth anything -- until we come behind Him.
One thinks of Mark in that way. Mark, you know, was converted -- a young man just converted -- and there sprang up in his soul a desire to serve the Lord. At that time Barnabas and Paul were about, and doubtless under the influence of Barnabas, Mark decided to go with them. What a thing it would be, no doubt he thought, to go out preaching the Gospel in the Company of Barnabas and Paul. How he would be able to come back, no doubt, with laurels. How he would be able to speak of exploits. All these things would be in the heart of a young man; and so, under the influence of Barnabas -- under natural influences, not spiritual -- he goes out to preach the Gospel with Paul and Barnabas, and serve. It says they had John as their minister -- or their servant -- but Mark had not any idea of what was involved in service, as we shall see.
They sailed to Cyprus, and they went across also to Salamis, and they came to Paphos, and there at Paphos they are met by “a sorcerer,” a “false prophet,” a “Jew,” “an enemy of all righteousness,” “a child of the devil.” Mark had not reckoned on that -- all the subtle resources of the evil one arrayed against them -- he had not reckoned on that. After that, it says that Paul went to Perga, in Pamphylia. One can understand Mark saying, “Paul, have a rest; this is terrible -- place after place, activity, conflict, service all the time,” and he gets as far as Perga, in Pamphylia, and he goes back. Poor Mark! Through natural influences he had taken service of a public character before he was ready for it.
He goes back discouraged and having failed. No laurels! No conversions! There he is, and
{60}
Barnabas afterwards says, “We will take him again.” “No,” says Paul. “He did not think it good to take him who went back from the work.” Paul says, “We will not take him,” and they separated about that.
What of Mark? There is Mark, feeling his failure and discouraged. He had not read Isaiah. He had not read that forty-second chapter: “Behold My servant whom I uphold, Mine elect in whom My soul delighteth.” “He shall not fail or be discouraged, till He have set judgment in the earth, the isles shall wait for His law.” The Spirit of God directed the heart of Mark to these Scriptures, and as he thought of God’s Servant, the Lord Jesus, as *He* trod that wonderful pathway of service, the fire burned, his heart burned within him, and his heart moved out towards that blessed Servant. Step by step he followed *His* path, and the spirit of God came behind his pen and he wrote the Gospel of Mark. He wrote about the pathway of service, the like of which there never was, and he did not write historically -- he wrote it from his heart. It was his delight to think of such a Servant as that, and later on, probably when Paul had read that Gospel, after Mark had had long years of meditating upon the pathway of the service of Jesus. Paul says to Timothy, “Bring Mark, for he is profitable to me for the ministry.” A man who appreciated Christ like that will do -- he will bring profit to the ministry; he will bring not profit to himself, but profit to the ministry. That is the secret, dear brethren, of any service that is of any account in the sight of God, and so one would like to leave that point there. All service of any kind has only value and power as it is done under the hand of God’s Servant.
{61}
Now I would like to divide up the service of God in a few ways in detail.
There is one way in which we can serve -- that is, as in the character of shepherds. That is one form of service.
If you were to read through from Abel onward, you would find that nearly all the great servants of God began there. They began their service as shepherds. Abel is the first. It says Abel was a keeper of sheep, and so it is right through. Amos says, “I was no prophet; God took me from following the sheep.” They all began there. David began there. Moses began there. Abraham began there. “Thy servants,” they say, “are shepherds, both we and our fathers.” One would like to commend that service to us all, but it can never be taken up unless it is taken up under the influence of the Chief Shepherd -- the Chief Shepherd, the Shepherd that is right in the front, the Shepherd that leads all other shepherds. That is how Peter speaks. Peter says, “When the Chief Shepherd shall appear.” Ah! Peter’s heart was moved. These things in Scripture, dear brethren, are not simply dry statements of fact; behind them is the heart of Peter. Peter, speaking about shepherds, says, “When the Chief Shepherd.” What remembrances that would bring up in the heart of Peter. How he would think of the Lord Jesus here on earth as that Good Shepherd. How he would think of His activities of a shepherd character, how he would think of Him taking the lambs in His bosom. His mind would go back, and he would think how the Lord folded the lambs gently in His bosom. How he would think, too, of the occasion when they came out to take the Lord, and in a true shepherd character He stood in front of the sheep, and He said, “If
{62}
ye seek Me let these go their way.” How he would think before that of a multitude of sheep that were gathered together -- five thousand, besides women and children -- and the Lord, with a shepherd’s heart, had compassion on the sheep not having a shepherd, and He says in effect -- “I will be their Shepherd.” Micah prophesies, “He shall stand and feed in the strength of Jehovah,” and the Lord Jesus stood there and fed them. All this Peter has in his heart.
Then he would think of how after the Lord Jesus came up from the dead He sent that message, “Go tell My disciples and Peter.” Ah! Peter’s heart was moved. “Go tell My disciples and Peter.” Peter was a sheep that was going astray. He says, “We were as sheep going astray, but are returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls.” How the Lord came after Peter again. He said, “The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared unto Simon.” How Peter would think of that interview when the Lord showed him what a true shepherd was. Then He said to Peter, “Now, Peter, you be a shepherd; you feed My lambs. Peter; feed My sheep, shepherd My sheep.”
All Peter’s shepherd activities sprang from his knowledge and appreciation of the Chief Shepherd; and so it is, dear friends, today. Whatever shepherd work is undertaken that is of any value, is undertaken under the influence of the Chief Shepherd, and it is a most important service -- never more important than today.
In the prophet Micah, after he had spoken of the Lord as a Shepherd that feeds His flock in the majesty of the Lord, we are told that, “When the Assyrian shall come into our land”
{63}
(that mighty scattering power that would break up the people of God) “we will raise up against him seven shepherds and eight principal men.” The prophet says when these mighty hordes of Assyrians, with their horses and chariots, come down to our land we will meet them with seven shepherds. That is not man’s way, is it? That is God’s way. That is what we need, dear brethren, with the scattering influences of evil coming into our land. If, in our local gatherings, there is working the influence of the wolf that would scatter the sheep, let each heart say, “We will raise up against him seven shepherds.” That will meet it. The power of the wolf is met by the shepherd spirit, and so one would just like to leave that point there, with the Lord Jesus as the Chief Shepherd at the head of all shepherds, giving character to their service.
Now I would like to come to another service which is open to the saints, and that is the service of Levites. In the Book of Numbers you see this, that all the Levites were engaged carrying everything connected with the tabernacle system. It was their work to carry it. The Ark, the altars, the veil, the curtains, the rings, the taches, the pins. They were all listed. The Levites¬ work and service was to carry all through the wilderness to the Land. How could they do it? How could such a service be properly cared for? The Spirit of God says, “Eleazar, the son of Aaron, he shall be the chief of the chiefs of the Levites.” The New Translation is, “Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, he shall be the prince of the princes of the Levites.”
Right ahead of all the other Levites there would stand the prince of the Levites, and that is the Lord Jesus Christ. In everything, it
{64}
says, “He has the pre-eminence.” So the Lord Jesus stands as the Prince of the princes of the Levites. We may be seeking in God’s grace and favour to do Levitical work, to carry the Lord’s interests through this wilderness scene. It may be a very small part given us to carry -- it may be only a pin, only a ring, just that which will help to keep things down or bind things together, but most important things. We can never carry them unless under the influence of the Prince of Levites. How blessedly the Lord carried everything through this scene for God. Wherever there was anything that belonged to the tabernacle how carefully He picked it up and carried it right to the end. Take, for instance, @Luke 7. There was in the house of Simon a little piece of brass that belonged to the tabernacle (manifest in the judgment of sin in the woman’s soul), and Simon the Pharisee (he was no Levite) would have got rid of that piece of brass. Not so the Lord. He picked it up and carried it. He says, ‘That is Mine.’ He covered it, He put His wing over it, He protected it. Later on, in the twelfth of John, there was the alabaster box of ointment that belonged to the tabernacle. Judas was not a Levite -- he had not a single Levitical instinct in him. He would sell it. The Lord Jesus, the Prince of Levites, says, “Let her alone.” ‘I want that.’ Now, dear brethren, we cannot take up Levitical work of any description unless it is under the blessed influence of the Prince of Levites. He has the first place. If we are not behind Him we are not in place at all. If it is not done in His blessed spirit it is not done at all.
Now I would leave that and pass on to another sphere of, service that is open to all the
{65}
people of God, and that is the service of priesthood. Perhaps someone says, “Oh! I thought they were just a special class that were priests according to God.” No, dear brethren, all the redeemed say, “Thou hast made us kings and priests unto God and His Father.” All saints are priests to take up the service of God, but we can never exercise priestly service rightly unless it is under the influence and direction of the One Who is called the “Great High Priest.” There is one Priest, dear brethren, stands out right in front of all the other priests, right in the lead. “In everything,” it says, “having the first place,” and so, if we are going to take up priestly service, how shall we do it unless it is under the influence of Christ, that Great High Priest, Who is over the House of God. What a Priest He is!
Priestly service has two distinct characters. One is from man to God, to draw near to God on behalf of man, to present those sacrifices in which He delights -- that is one side of priesthood. Peter knew all about that. He says, “A holy priesthood.” That is the service of the priesthood towards God. Then the other part of priesthood is that the priest comes out from the presence of God, and he draws near to man. He does it in a dual capacity. On the one hand he carries to man the compassion of the heart of God. What marks a priest is that he has compassion on them that are ignorant and out of the way. The other feature is that “his lips keep knowledge, and they seek the law at his mouth.” Now the Lord Jesus Christ is that Great High Priest in both characters, the holy Priest and the royal Priest that Peter speaks of -- a royal Priest towards men. The Gospel of John presents Christ as
{66}
the holy Priest approaching God with the sacrifices: The Gospel of Luke presents Christ as the royal Priest coming out from God with the compassions of the heart of God for those who are ignorant and out of the way, and also as the One Whose lips: keep knowledge. How the Lord stands in the eleventh of John, and again in the seventeenth, as the Great High Priest in that holy character with the priestly garments of the twenty-eighth of Exodus -- every one of them -- on. The gold is there, the purple is there, the scarlet is there, and the fine twined linen ephod is there, the breastplate is there, and the shoulder pieces are there, on both of which are the names of all the people of God. The Lord stands there in full priestly garb. How clearly: we see those onyx stones and those shoulder pieces with all the names of the people of God on.
He says, “Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also that shall believe on Me through their word.” He draws near to God at the golden altar with the incense, and speaks to God in relation to His glory amongst His people, and His garments of fine linen come out very clearly. He says, “I have glorified Thee on the earth; I have finished the work which Thou gavest Me to do.” How beautiful are the garments the Lord is wearing there, those garments of glory and beauty. One would commend the seventeenth of John to our hearts as illustrating what priestly garments are. On the other hand, how the Lord stands as the Royal Priest in Luke, everywhere bringing out the compassions of God towards man. Then “they sat at His feet and heard His Word.” That is Luke. He was there teaching men for God. Dear brethren, it is open to all the saints, to take up this service -- to draw near to God with
{67}
the sacrifices of praise continually -- the fruit of our lips -- giving thanks to His name, but it can only be done according to God under, the blessed influence of the Great High Priest.
It is open to us to draw near to man with the compassions of the heart of God, but it can only be done under the influence of that Royal Priest, that King that is a Priest upon the throne -- that Royal Priest, the Lord Jesus Christ -- and so He stands at the head of all the Priests as the Great High Priest, having in everything the pre-eminence.
Now just a few more words. There is another service that is open to all the saints, and that is the service of song. What a blessed service that is. That is one of the greatest of all. How shall we sing? Where shall we get the note from? Habakkuk is thinking about that. He has got a song in his heart. He says, “Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail,” and further on he says, “There shall be no herd in the stalls.” Though there is nothing that would make him outwardly happy, he says, “Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.” He has got a song, but he feels that he cannot, he is not adequate, to bring it to the heart of God, and so he says at once, “To the Chief Singer on my stringed instruments.” He hands that song that is in his heart over to the Chief Singer. That is the place of the Lord Jesus -- at the head of all singers. All singing that reaches God’s ear reaches Him through the Chief Singer. It is led by Him; it is controlled by Him. It comes up to the ear of God from Him. You look over the headings of the Psalms and you will find that is the bearing of a good many of them.
{68}
David writes the Psalm -- it is a song -- and then hands it over to the Chief Musician -- that is, Christ. *He* takes that song and renders it to the heart of God. Dear brethren, the Lord delights in that service. That is a service that is going on for ever. There are a great many songs to sing. One could not speak of them tonight, but the Lord leads them all. You remember when God laid the foundations of the earth it says, “The morning stars sang together.” They sang creation’s song, celebrating God’s greatness. When the Lord Jesus became man He takes the lead in that song, as He takes what the Creator gives in the loaves and fishes, and He lifts up His eyes and blesses. That is the song of creation. The Lord leads it.
We have all followed what the Lord started then, as the Chief Singer, and so with every song; He leads all the singing that goes up to God’s ear, and He is called the “Sweet Psalmist,” and He is going on with the singing, conducting the service of song until we come to the last two or three Psalms, and what a song it is! The Chief Singer calls upon the heavens to praise God. It says, “Praise Him, ye heavens; praise Him, sun and moon; praise Him, all ye stars of light”; and then He comes down and says “Praise the Lord from the earth, fire and hail; snow and vapour, stormy winds fulfilling His word, mountains and all hills, fruitful trees, kings of the earth and all peoples, princes”; and He goes on leading every part of the universe into song to God until he reaches the end of the one hundred and fiftieth Psalm, and the Psalms are finished. He says, “Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord.” This is done under the hand of the Sweet Psalmist of Israel. He is the Chief Singer.
{69}
He says, “In the midst of the Church will I sing praises to Thee.” If we have part -- and we can have part, and we do have part -- it is under the influence and direction of the Chief Singer or the Chief Musician.
One delights to think of eternity, and what fills eternity is song. The whole universe, under the hand of Christ, is singing to God responses as they know them, and then it says God joins in it. It says, “He will rest in His love, He will joy over them with singing.” What a contrast to what is here. It says in Genesis that God looked down upon the earth and it grieved Him at His heart. Under the blessed hand of the Chief Singer the end is this, that everything is singing. God is singing, and the whole universe; under the hand of Christ, is singing. That is the thing that goes on for ever.
There is one more word I would like to leave, and I cannot say much about it. There is another service the greatest of all -- that is open to every believer, and that is the service of Sonship, which, dear brethren, is infinitely great. “Let My son go that he may serve Me,” said God. There is a service connected with Sonship that the Lord Jesus gives us part in, but how one delights to come back to this -- that in everything He has the first place, and so He is spoken of “as the firstborn of many brethren.” It speaks of “being conformed to the image of His Son” in order that He might be the firstborn of many brethren. The Firstborn of this family is in the lead. He stands at the head, but there are many others. What a word it is: “Many brethren.” The brethren of Christ are the sons of God, and they share His part and place and relationship to the Father, but they do so with the Lord Jesus as
{70}
the Firstborn. That wonderful service to the heart of God is under the influence and direction of the Son of God.
It is a service that is connected with relationship. “Go tell My brethren that I ascend unto My Father and your Father, to My God and your God.” What God will get for ever is the service of sons. What marks sons is that they enjoy relationship with the Father, which implies the enjoyment of Divine affections on the one hand and intelligence as to the mind of God on the other.
The sons of God, in Scripture, always are intelligent and sympathetic in whatever God is doing, and they are able to minister to His heart -- they joy in His love. “That the love wherewith Thou hast loved Me may be in them, and I in them.” That is the love of Sonship. One can only say as to that, that the measure in which we enter into it is the measure in which we are under the direction and influence of the Son of God. The Lord Jesus Christ is the firstborn of many brethren. May the Lord grant to us all that we might be able to touch these wonderful, Divine, eternal realities, as having our hearts more and more brought into attachment to Christ.
The secret of Christianity is that Christ has His place in our hearts, and that He is waxing greater and greater. That keeps us, and that alone fits us to take up the service of God in any way whatever.
