{#SPEND AND BE SPENT}
{1}
"SPEND AND BE SPENT"
@Romans 8: 31 - 32; @Isaiah 49: 3 - 4; @2 Corinthians 12: 14 - 19
One has the desire, beloved brethren, that each one of us might be stimulated more fully to commit, without reserve, all that we have to the divine interests. One speaks for oneself, but I am sure most of us often feel humbled at how much there is with us that we reserve -- reserve for ourselves. But one would desire that the Lord might increase the desire with us to be here for Him, with less reserve. One looks with hope at the potentialities there are with us in what the Apostle Peter speaks of as "the rest of our time" (@1 Peter 4: 2). Even the oldest have that. How long they will have it no one knows; but they have that -- "the rest of our time." When one thinks of the young men and women, and the children, who can measure what there would be for God if there was less reserve in our committal to Him in all we have! The Apostle Peter said, "The time past suffices to have done the will of the Gentiles" (@1 Peter 4: 3). He says that it is sufficient, whether it be long, as, alas! it is with some, or whether it be short. The time past suffices to have done the will of the Gentiles.
And so I thought we might, with the Lord's help, speak of that which would influence the heart towards the spending that the Apostle Paul speaks of. He says of himself that he is ready to spend, and be utterly spent. There is a man who, under
{2}
certain influence, says he is ready to be utterly spent. The word "utterly" implies that he will not hold back anything. That is not reached on the line of the sense of duty. It could never be reached like that. As one has said, "Not the sense of right and duty, but the sight of peerless worth." That is what effects things for God. The whole period of the law showed that the sense of duty, the laying things down as a legal obligation, did not secure what God desired. God said, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength, and thy neighbour as thyself." God required it all, but the sense of legal duty never secured it for God or man.
And so one would like to speak of what will secure it, and what did secure it in the Apostle Paul's own life, and ways, and spirit, and steps. What secured it was what we have read in the second and third scriptures. There was, first, the knowledge of what God had done. It was the knowledge in his soul in power of the One who did not spare His own Son, and it was the constraint of the love of Christ leading him to come to a certain judgment. He says, "We thus judge, that if One died for all, then were all dead; and that He died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto Him who died for them and rose again" (@2 Corinthians 5: 14 - 15). He judged that as under the influence of the love of Christ -- the One who, in the scripture in Isaiah, says, "I have spent." So that we have in the
{3}
first scripture what God has spent, speaking reverently, and we have in the second scripture the Lord as the great spender, and, under the influence of these two wonderful powers we have the apostle saying that he is ready to be utterly spent. That is the secret of anything that has ever been for God, or that ever will be. That is the secret of all true devotion to Him now, and that is what we are really seeking to reach, that there might be with us increased devotion. Someone has said that if there was more devotion there would be more gift amongst us, and I am sure that is right. Gift springs out of devotion; it springs out of desire; it is given as the answer to desire . The line of it is devotion, and the secret of devotion is an apprehension of the love of God and the love of Christ.
There is another passage which speaks of spending. You remember the prodigal son? It says that he had spent all. That is the position of the sinner. It is the position of man as having received something of God, for man received something. There was one thing man had at the outset, and that was some knowledge of God. As it says in Romans, "When they knew God." There was a time when man as a race had some
{4}
true knowledge of God. But all that God gave to man, as set forth in the prodigal, was spent, and he spent in self-gratification. It says, "He wasted his substance in riotous living; and when he had spent all." I do not know all who are here; there may be young men or young women who, in their hearts, are looking that way, who chafe under the restraint of what is of God, as the prodigal did, and who look forward to the moment when they will be able to spend for themselves -- spend all, spend their time, spend their affections, on objects of their own choosing; spend, perhaps, what money they may have, as they will. But what the Lord shows is that this man, in travelling that road, found himself eventually with the swine in the field. That is, he found himself in the world with all its uncleanness, and fain to fill his belly with the husks that the swine did eat, and he began to be in want. I would just call the attention of the youngest mind and heart here tonight to this -- that, in giving up divine restraint, and seeking to spend for yourselves, is the road to the field where the swine are. It is the road to the husks which the swine eat. It is the road to want.
Leaving that for the moment, let us look at this scripture I have read. The Apostle Paul says, "He that spared not His own Son." I would like to suggest a little as to God as One who spent, as the great spender of what He had, for scripture suggests the thought of God being rich. To spend, we must have something. No one can spend if he has nothing; but scripture
{5}
shows that God was rich -- rich in unfathomable, immeasurable ways. The Apostle Paul, as he thinks of it, says, "O the depths of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge, of God" (@Romans 11: 33). What a wonderful store of wisdom and of knowledge God has! Better than money, is it not? Even in this life wisdom is the principal thing, says Solomon. "Therefore, get wisdom." But God's riches, His treasures of wisdom and knowledge -- think of them all!
I wanted to speak of God in connection with His *own* Son, implying that the Lord Jesus Christ, as man here, was God's. Apart from what God has, as God, in His omnipotent power, and wisdom, and knowledge, the heart is directed in this passage to God's own Son, meaning, dear brethren, that the Lord Jesus Christ, as man, was peculiarly for the heart of God. He was *His*. The Lord Jesus, in taking a body and coming into this world, and being here as man, was here for the heart of God.
Think of how that was proved and expressed! It was expressed on many occasions. It was expressed at the Jordan. There you have the divine review of the life of Jesus up to that point. The thirty years in secret are under the eye of God and for the heart of God. It says, "He increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and men" (@Luke 2: 52). But the message from heaven at the baptism in the Jordan is God expressing what joy, what pleasure, He found in His own Son; as He says, "This is My beloved Son, in whom I have found My delight." He found it in Him. ‘He is mine,' He says. On the Mount of
{6}
Transfiguration you have the review of the three and a half years, and the same word comes, "This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear Him," God in that way endorsing that wonderful life, and claiming it as His. "My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." What a thing for our hearts to consider -- those wonderful days, lived to God -- the life of Jesus -- the true wine that makes glad the heart of God and man, every day of that life bringing joy to the heart of God.
Those days are not all heaped together in the divine account. Every one of them has been observed; indeed, the Lord says that days would come when men would desire to see one of them, just one. But, as God looked down, every day was observed, and the memorial of all those days is laid up before God in the golden pot that has manna. In the hidden manna there is the divine enjoyment and appreciation of each one of those days. They were the days of heaven upon earth. Scripture separates them. John loves to separate them. He speaks of Jesus and says, "There stands One among you whom ye know not." He is standing there, and John is looking at Him as standing there on one day. And then it says, "*The next day* John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world!" (@John 1: 29). And then it says, "*The next day after* John stood ... And, looking upon Jesus as He walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God!" (@John 1: 35 - 36). And then it says again, "*The third day* there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee,"
{7}
the thought being how each day is observed, even by God's servants, even by those who love Him, the friends of the bridegroom who stand and greatly rejoice. God's blessed eye and heart delighted to look upon each day, the eyes of the Lord being upon the righteous. How those eyes would rest from running to and fro as they had done, and still do amongst men, and rest in blessed complacency on that One who lived here for Him -- "My beloved Son." How that ear would bow continually, and indeed did, to listen to His prayer! Whenever Jesus spoke to heaven the Divine ear was attentive always, for the Lord could say, "I know that Thou hearest Me always." All this and much more might be said, indicating what is meant by the word "His own Son."
When you think of Abraham, he was a rich man. He represented God in that way. What wonderful reserves he had! It says he was rich in sheep, and in cattle, and in gold, and in silver, and in man servants, and in maid servants. But there was one thing he had more precious than them all. They might all go, and yet Abraham have something left more precious to his own heart, and that was Isaac. God told Abraham to offer Isaac, "Thine only son, Isaac, whom thou lovest," and in the surrender of Isaac God was well pleased, because, dear brethren, He saw the expression of what was in His own heart -- "that thou hast not withheld thine only son." And so He said, "In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven" (@Genesis 22:17).
{8}
That was God's delight in seeing a feeble representation in a man, of His own character.
That was what the apostle had behind those words when he said, "He that spared not His own Son." He looked at Calvary. He adds, "but delivered Him up," the word "delivered" meaning the deliberate act of God. It was no question of chance, there was nothing done hurriedly, but He was delivered by the deliberate counsel and foreknowledge of God, delivered as a sacrifice; but the thought is that *God* did it, and He spared not His own Son. He did not spare Him, the reference being to God's own heart, not in connection with the feelings of the Lord Jesus Christ at the moment, but what it was to the heart of God. It says, "He spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all." In the light of that, the apostle Paul says that there is nothing God will withhold. "How shall He not with Him freely give us all things?" (@Romans 8: 32). A heart like that would withhold nothing. That is God. How little we appreciate it, one feels! How little the greatness of those words "His own Son" is really laid hold of!
The church is purchased; there again is the idea of spending. The church is purchased with the blood of His own. That blood was what Scripture calls "precious." The value of it, the value of the life of Jesus, who can estimate it to God? Worthless, I know, in this world, but Peter loved to speak of it. He called it "precious" blood. That is not what man, or even
{9}
our own hearts, apprehend, it is what is seen by the heart of God. "When I see the blood," we read. The blood is for the eye of God, and it is infinitely precious, and it represents the spending of divine love. That is what we come to in the Supper each Lord's day. The Lord Jesus would bring to our hearts, as the Mediator of the new covenant, the divine spending -- God's spending of that which was infinitely precious to His own heart -- the precious blood.
Now, dear brethren, we come to the other side. We come to that which is expressed in the Lord Jesus Christ, and so in the scripture I have read in @Isaiah 49 we find these words, "I have spent." It is the Lord undoubtedly speaking as the true Israel. He says, "I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain" (@Isaiah 49: 4). The point to which I want to call attention is that He presents himself to our hearts as spending. That He had whereof to spend, how we delight to recognise! For, dear brethren, He was unsearchably rich; coming into this world, I know, in poverty, in this scene as, in man's account, having nowhere to lay His head, having to say, "Show me a penny" -- yet every heart would gladly see that He was unsearchably rich, that He had whereof to spend, and He spent it. He did not withhold it. It is the same idea as "He that spared not His own Son." So when you come to the Lord Jesus Christ in manhood you see the One who was here in this world spending everything. He sold *all* that He had. No human heart could ever compass all that He had, but He spent it.
{10}
He sold, and He bought.
The word I read in Isaiah says, "I have spent my strength." Have you ever thought (I am sure every heart *has* thought) of His strength, spent here for God, spent here for man? One loves to think of His strength, never weakened -- the strength of that precious vessel, that holy body, never weakened an iota by the influence and effect of sin. There never was in that holy vessel a trace of human weakness that arose from sin. How much we suffer in that way God only knows; from our own sin and from the sin of our forefathers visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the children, and the children's children to the third and fourth generation; but in that blessed vessel, the Lord Jesus Christ, that holy body, there never was a trace, from the beginning to the end, of the weakening of His strength through the effect of sin. But He spent His strength. Think of Him at the well of Samaria! He had spent His strength. It says, "Being wearied with His journey." Spent for what? Spent for himself? Never at any time! He must needs go through Samaria. Why? Because there is a heart there that can be a worshipper of God, that can add to the chorus of worship that will fill the heart of God through eternity. That soul must be found, that heart must be sought and found for God, even though He be wearied with His journey. On the other hand, there is a longing soul, someone who wants something. She knows not what, but she is longing for something to satisfy her affections. His blessed feet must go
{11}
there to minister living water, that she may thirst no more for ever, and He was "wearied with His journey."
Then on one of those wondrous days in the beginning of Mark we have the Lord again spending His strength. If you read the greater part of that first chapter of Mark you will see a most wondrous sight. You will see one day, beginning in the morning with prayer to God, and filled in in a way that makes any one of us ashamed of ourselves -- a day that puts every other day that anyone has ever lived into oblivion. At the end of it it says, "At even, when the sun did set ... " when everyone else was finished, for man goes forth to his labour until the evening, and then he returns. "At even, when the sun did set, they brought unto Him all that were diseased, and them that were possessed with demons." They laid them in the streets, and it says He healed many of their diseases, and He cast out many demons, right into the night; spending His strength, dear brethren, not for himself, but for God and for man.
We travel on in our thoughts. He is coming up to the grave of Lazarus. What for? He is facing the hatred of man, so that Thomas says, "Let us also go, that we may die with Him" (@John 11: 16). What is He going for? The glory of God. "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God," He says. For the outshining of what God is; for the ministering to those in sorrow; for the healing of the broken-hearted, He comes up, carrying with Him the load of sorrow that He had accumulated
{12}
already, for it says, "He carried our sorrows." With the burden of sorrow weighing upon His blessed spirit, He comes there to take another sorrow; spending His strength.
We see Him at Gethsemane, sweating as it were, great drops of blood falling down to the ground; His strength going, not for himself, but for God. "Nevertheless," He says, "not My will, but thine be done."
We see Him at Calvary, in the midst of all the human suffering of the moment, spending His strength upon the thief. What for? To get a plant for the Paradise of God. He sees in that repentant man another plant for God's blessed Paradise, to minister to the pleasure of God, and He will have him. He ministers to the dying need of a poor soul, I know, but He spends himself. We see Him in the weakness of death, crucified through weakness; His strength is spent for God, for man; spent, not because of any inherent weakness, as men have it, that must bring death, for it says, "He weakened my strength in the way." That blessed strength of Jesus would have endured eternally as man here on earth, but He accepted the weakening of it by the hand of God. "He weakened my strength in the way; He shortened My days." The Lord Jesus accepted that, for the service of God, and for the eternal blessing of man.
But He went on spending in other ways. We cannot speak of it tonight in detail, but He spent. It says, "He sold all." Indeed, what the Supper brings to us is that He spent himself. "This is My body,
{13}
which is given for you." His precious body represents himself. "Christ loved the church, and gave himself for it," and behind that word "Himself" is everything that He possessed. Indeed, not only can the church take up that language, but each one of us can take it up. Each individual can take up this wonderful theme -- "The Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me," as the language of one's soul, as well as of the whole church. He is spending, spending for the church, spending for each one of us. That is what the apostle has in mind when he says, "The love of Christ constrains us." That is what helped him to produce that judgment -- "that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves." Those are the two great elements connected with the Supper. There is one other open to us, in the box. I do not say it is part of the Supper, but it is open to us to begin to spend. It is open to us to begin to contribute to the interests of God, as affected by what God has given, and by what Christ has given. There is the opportunity given to us to contribute.
That brings me to the apostle again. One loves to come to the Apostle Paul, because Christianity finds its living expression in a man like ourselves. He belongs to us. He says, "All things are yours, Paul." We love to come to Paul and see the working out of what is to be seen in Christianity. Here is a man who says, "I am ready to be utterly spent; I am not holding back." God knows, it is under the eye of God. It is not that we want to talk about it to men, but God knows. "I am ready to be
{14}
utterly spent." It was not always so with him. He had something to spend. What did he have? Well, he had what all of us have. He had a body, and he had a mind, and a heart; he had affections, and he had time, and sometimes he had even some money. But whatever he had he says, "I am not withholding anything." Not a thing! As I said, it was not always so. We think of days when his body was used very differently; when his mind was engaged with this: "I verily thought I ought to do many things contrary to this Name;" when his heart, instead of being filled with love to God, and to the church, and to each individual, was filled with insolence and persecution, breathing out threatening and slaughter; when those hands were used to hale men and women to prison; when at those feet were laid the clothes of the young men who stoned Stephen; and when those lips were giving consent to it.
But I had in mind to speak a little of one more thing, as teaching us what the Lord Jesus had, for, as we have observed, we can only spend what we have. What did Jesus have? As a man here on earth He had the most wonderful thing of all. Not only did He have strength, but He enjoyed the unclouded light and favour of God. There never was, in the whole of that pathway to Calvary, a shadow. How much we know about shadows over our soul -- the sense of darkness and shadow through the effect of sin. But the Lord Jesus sojourned here never having a shadow, able always to lift up His eyes to heaven. He lifted up His eyes to heaven and said, "Father." Not a
{15}
shadow! He had the sense always of God being with Him. It says, "For God was with Him." What a wonderful spectacle for our hearts to see! Like Abraham and Isaac, the two went together; and from Bethlehem to Calvary God was with Him.
Then, dear brethren, He had the divine ear. He had the ear of God, for He said, "I know that thou hearest Me." This represents untold wealth. I am sure that if our hearts were true in this world they would say, "Indeed, it is worth more than all things that this world can produce to have the favour of God, to have God with us, to have the divine ear." Such the Lord Jesus had absolutely; and He spent it! He did not keep it for himself. It is wonderful to see that He spent it. When He gave himself He spent all that He had. I am speaking of what He had as man. If we turn to Calvary again we see it spent. Instead of blessed light and God shining without a cloud into His soul, He goes into the darkness -- the darkness of the time of sacrifice that is referred to in Abraham's day, the horror of a great darkness. He is in the darkness. Instead of God being with Him, we have those terrible words, "My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?" He is forsaken. Instead of the divine ear always attentive, it says, "I cry in the daytime, but Thou hearest not" (@Psalm 22: 2). What is He doing? Spending -- spending the greatest treasure a man can have, what He alone as man did have, for none other ever had it as He had it.
But here is a man in @2 Corinthians12 who says that there is not a thing withheld. He
{16}
could show his hands to the elders at Ephesus and say, "These hands ministered to my necessities; I have not been chargeable to you." Night and day he worked, so as not to be chargeable to them, making no claim on anyone, receiving at times the bounty of saints, not because he wanted it, but only because he wanted it put to their account. "These hands have ministered to my necessities night and day." If a little money accrued to him, it was shared by those that were with him. Not only for his own interests, but there were those with him less able to work than he was -- Timothy's often infirmities, Trophimus left sick, others of the Lord's servants needing to be brought on their way, such a man as Apollos. All this was in the apostle's heart when he had anything. Those blessed feet, beautiful feet, corresponding with Christ's, going from house to house, as it says in @Acts 20, not to hale men and women to prison, but to carry into each house the knowledge of God, and the love of God, and the love of Christ. His heart open towards God, bestowed on the saints, even if there was no return -- "though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved." But he went on, and held nothing back; spending his time, night and day. Whatever arose, Paul was available. The brethren knew they could count on him, that he would not keep anything back. His mind -- he says to the Colossians, "Set your mind on things above." He could not say that, if his was not there. His mind was given to the things of God. He says in Timothy, "Meditate on
{17}
these things." Only one who had done it could speak like that.
And so we have the picture of a man -- not a picture, but a living reality of a man -- held by the love of God and by what God had contributed, the spending of divine love, the love of God, and the love of Christ, so held by it, so constrained, that he was delivered from the dominating principle of the world, and that is selfishness. What Satan put into the human heart, and what is the governing factor of the whole world, is self -- "the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life." Lust is that I want something for myself. Pride is that I adorn myself with it when I have got it -- I call attention to myself. There is nothing else but that in the world. What a solemn indictment! "*All* that is in the world," says the Apostle John. Those two principles are enthroned in every human heart, but they were not enthroned in Paul's. He says, "I am ready to spend and be utterly spent for your sakes," delivered from the dominion of this world. How? By taking it up because it is right to do it? No. He is so affected by the sight of peerless worth that, his heart dipping into the ocean of divine love, his soul constrained by the love of Christ, he is held here for God, and for Christ, and for the brethren, and for man, without any reserve.
Now he says, "Not only myself, but I sent to you Titus, and with him a brother." "Did Titus make gain of you? Walked we not in the same spirit? Walked we not in the same steps?" Do not let us think that is
{18}
apostolic, and that it is beyond every brother and sister, weak and feeble and insignificant as we are. It says, "I sent Titus, and with him a brother." We do not know his name, but it says, "Walked we not in the same spirit, and in the same steps?" Timothy is the man for our day. He says, "I have nobody like-minded who will care with genuine feeling how *you* get on" -- not how he gets on. Timothy was a weak man naturally, but he says, ‘There is this concern with Timothy -- he cares for you, how you get on.' I love to think of Gaius. The Apostle Paul says, "Gaius, mine host, and of the whole assembly" (@Romans 16: 23). What is wrapped up in that? Here is a man who has a house, and he does not keep anything back. "Mine host and of the whole assembly." John takes it up in beautiful language, "The elder unto the well-beloved Gaius, who I love in the truth. Beloved, I wish above all things that thou mayest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospereth ... Beloved, thou doest faithfully whatsoever thou doest to the brethren and to strangers" (@3 John 1-5). Above everything else he wanted for Gaius, he desired that he should prosper and be in health. He was a man that could be trusted with prosperity and health. Why? Because he was a man who had been delivered from the dominion of self. Self did not govern him. He had a home, and he used it for the saints. The apostle desired that God might prosper him and give him health to continue, not in the line of selfishness and self-seeking, but to continue to present to God, under the
{19}
eye of God, something of His own blessed character, something of the features of Christ.
What a thing it is to think of what God sees, in this world! I know there is another side. What does He see? He sees everything, for everything is naked and open. If we think on the side of what is evil, what a spectacle for the eye of God! But on the other hand, what a joy it is to think of what God sees going on all over the world -- the expression in life of himself, of His own character, of the features of Christ. You and I may contribute very little to it; I am sure one would feel that. It takes the whole church to express the glory of God. It takes the whole church to be the body of Christ in its fulness, to express all that Christ is. But it is given to us, and it is true of us in the measure in which God's unbounded love and the love of Christ have really been operative with us, to fill in our day here expressing what is of God. How much God sees, unseen by the world, hidden away, of spending -- spending time, spending strength, spending affections, spending money (may be), in some instances spending all, through the effect and influence of the love of God, who spared not His own Son. God sees every bit of that. We come across a little of it sometimes, but God sees every bit of it that is on earth. It is the only thing that makes this scene habitable. Scripture speaks of the habitable parts of this earth. The only habitable parts where the delights of Christ can be, are where what is of God is lived
{20}
and expressed in the saints.
The Lord help us. One only desires to stimulate the earnest longing with each one of us that the rest of our days might be more definitely and unreservedly held here for God, and all that we have as well. May it be so, for His name's sake!
W.J.H.
Adelaide, 14/4/1928
{21}
SUBJECTION
@2 Thessalonians 2: 7, 8; @Luke 1: 38; @Luke 2: 1 - 7; @1 Corinthians 15: 24 - 28
What I want to suggest, beloved brethren, is the importance of subjection; and, with the Lord's help, I would desire to indicate that, if we are to be in accord with the mind of God in any relationship or position in which God has set us, or if we are to be prepared for that eternity that lies ahead into which we are about to enter, subjection is imperative as a state that is wrought in our souls; not simply that as to certain actions, we obey, but that the spring of those actions, is a state of subjection that exists in our souls. One feels the importance of it more because of the intensely solemn moment in which our lot is cast in this world. Without doubt we are rapidly drawing near to the moment that I read of in the epistle to the Thessalonians, when one will be revealed whom the Spirit of God calls by name -- "*the* lawless one", or, as our ordinary version gives it, "that Wicked".
{22}
There is about to appear the great leader, whose characteristic feature and name is lawlessness, and the darkening influences that will reach a climax with his presence on earth, are already here. The smoke of the pit out of which he comes -- for it says that he ascends out of the bottomless pit -- is already filling the earth, darkening every right influence that has hitherto governed the minds of men, affecting every relationship where subjection is proper.
In the wisdom of God, from our very birth, we are brought into a position in which subjection is the first feature. As children, the mind of God for children is subjection. The influence of the lawless one is being felt intensely in that relationship. Those of us who have children feel intensely the darkening there. Then, if I refer just for a moment to women, the mind of God for the woman is subjection to the man; but the influence of the lawless one from the pit, is breaking that down. Again, as to the wife, her place according to the mind of God, is subjection to her own husband, that too, is being destroyed. The principle of subjection to the higher powers, is the mind of God in respect of government; it is being undermined everywhere. The principle of subjection of the servant to his
{23}
master, is being abandoned everywhere. I need not say that that which professes to be the church, is the manifest abandoning that subjection. The awful influences of lawlessness are darkening this scene, and God, I am sure, would save us from it, by conveying to our hearts the blessedness of subjection, not that we accept it as inevitable, but that we accept it as *loving* it.
Hence I would desire to speak of Christ -- the blessed One in whom every thought of God for men finds perfect expression. As the Lord said, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me". Whatever we may consider, everything is expressed perfectly, and can only be learnt perfectly from Christ. Thus I desire, with the Lord's help, to seek to present subjection, as it is seen in its blessed perfection in Christ, so that, as seeing it in Him, we may learn to love it, and thus get the gain that it brings.
I know that certain features of subjection were expressed here, in measure, before He came; but one loves to think that everything that has been right and of God was but the backward glow of the rising sun. As the sun comes up and we get the present shining of it, there still remain the beams of light that
{24}
go backward, and every feature that was of God, from Abel onward, was really the beaming of that blessed light, that *great light* that the Lord speaks of: "The people sitting in darkness has seen a great light" (@Matthew 6: 16). The beams of that light went backward, so that everything that was of God from Abel forward, was a ray of that light. The apostle Peter speaks of it, "The Spirit of Christ which was in them" (@1 Peter 1: 11), not that we imply it was there, or read it into it, but it *was* there; the Spirit of Christ was there "in them". So, if Abel was marked by subjection, which lies behind the Lord calling him "righteous Abel", it was that which he derived from Christ; and if Abraham was subject to the divine command "Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house", he went out as subject. To Moses God said, "my servant Moses"; and of David He said, "I have found David my servant"; these were men who were subject to God as having the Spirit of Christ. But I wanted just to indicate as the Lord may give grace, some sense of the perfection of subjection as seen in Christ Himself.
So, if we come to the outset of His entrance into time, it is as One who was "from eternity", whom the Spirit of God speaks as "being in
{25}
the form of God". What infinite greatness! Subjection does not apply to the form of God, I need not say; it is for God to command. Innumerable hosts of angels are before Him, as it says, "hearkening unto the voice of his word" (@Psalm 103: 20), bending their ears, awaiting the divine command. Of Gabriel it says, "I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God", but the form of God has never been seen, and never will be seen, by a creature: "Dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see; to whom be honour and eternal might. Amen." (@1 Timothy 6: 16). But the One who was in the form of God took a servant's form. Our hearts cannot take that in. "Subsisting in the form of God", it says He took -- it was a deliberate, definite act -- "a bondman's form". He *took* a condition in which subjection could be perfectly expressed. The setting of the passage in Philippians is primarily that the mind was there to do it before the act was consummated. The apostle says, "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus". It was firstly, an act of mind, to take a servant's form, to come into a condition where subjection could be expressed, to accept the absolute will of God -- for that is the idea of a bondman. A bondman is not at liberty to act for
{26}
himself; a bondman is bound by the will of his master. The word "master" in some places, means despot; it means one who will not brook, who will not tolerate another will. The Lord Jesus took a bondman's form and was found in fashion as a Man.
Who is there that is suited for the coming in of Christ? What vessel is there that God will use as prepared under His own mighty hand of power, for Him for the entrance of such a One into the world? One indeed of whom it is said, "Lo, I *come* ... to do thy will, O God". The Spirit of God selects a certain vessel for this supremely great act, when He should take a "bondman's form" and be "found in figure as a man". (@Philippians 2: 7, 8)Who is it? The verse I read indicates the suitability of Mary to be such a vessel. She says, "Behold the bondmaid of the Lord". She corresponded subjectively, with the mind that had decided to take a bondman's form, the bondmaid corresponding with the Bondman. "Behold the bondmaid of the Lord; be it to me according to thy word". There was in that beloved woman's soul, wrought in it subjectively, subjection to the will of God.
Then the Lord Jesus Himself is born as Joseph and Mary are in the very act of expressing subjection, according to the mind of God.
{27}
The decree as to the census had gone forth from Caesar Augustus, the alien power that then was, a decree naturally irritant to the heart of any Jew, but recognising the power God had ordained, Joseph and Mary, at cost to themselves that we cannot fully understand, carried out, in subjection God's mind in relation to the higher powers; and at that very moment the Lord Jesus is found here in this scene, in the very atmosphere and conditions of subjection.
He moves from that point, and we next see Him at twelve years of age, a solemn age, an age that is testing perhaps more than most. The Lord says to Mary consequent upon those twelve years in secret, "Did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" He assumes that she would have understood in those twelve years, how imperative it was for Him to be subject to the will of God, that His Father's business should control and govern Him. Nevertheless, at that very moment it says that He went down to Nazareth and was "subject unto them" -- expressing perfectly from twelve years and onward, the mind of God during that period. It says, He "was subject unto them". What days they were -- the eye and heart of God alone can put an estimate upon them! Then He "began
{28}
to be about thirty years of age", indicating what those days of subjection were to God, for He says, at the close of them, "Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I have found delight"; not "I do find" though that would be true, but "I have". God had looked upon every one of those days, and the divine estimate is expressed of what that subjection in secret and obscurity was to Him: "in thee, I have found my delight".
But then we follow Him during those three and a half years, and it is indicated that they are taken account of in days. The Spirit of God suggests in the book of Daniel, a period like them, in which every one of them is remembered: "Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and thirty-five days" (@Daniel 12: 12). The days are taken account of, every one of them, and all were days of subjection. They were begun in a way that makes one feel intensely humbled when we compare our days with His. How many of us must feel like Jacob, "few and evil have been the days of the years of my pilgrimage", but that does not in any wise represent those blessed days of His! They may have been few, as men count days -- but they were infinitely blessed! They were begun each morning in subjection, as it says, "He wakeneth morning
{29}
by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed" (@Isaiah 1: 4). Think of that, beloved brethren; every single day, morning by morning, His ear was opened for instruction. It is the Bondman waiting upon His Master whom He loved for instructions for the day. Every single day was like that! No wonder the memorial of them is laid up before God; no wonder that the Lord said that the time would come when men would look to see *one* of those days just one! If it be that the instruction for one day was that "He must needs go through Samaria" -- albeit that the journey brings weariness to Him -- there is no question of *His* subjection -- so that at that very moment He says, "My meat is to do the will of him that sent me".
What shall we say of the closing day of those days? One can only remind you of what has been said:
<blockquote>"O day of mightiest sorrow,<br>Day, of unfathomed grief;<br>When Thou shouldst taste the horror<br>Of wrath, without relief:"</blockquote>
that was the last day of the sojourn of Christ here. See Him at the commencement of it, in prayer for instruction, knowing perfectly what
{30}
that day contained in His own spirit -- shrinking from it in a holiness that we adore, yet nevertheless asking for instructions: "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as *I* will, but as *thou* wilt". What subjection! We cannot view it save "a stone's throw" away; not even Peter or James or John could go all the way to contemplate it. He went a stone's throw beyond any point that they could go. But we see subjection in perfection there, as always. And so He dies: He lays down His life in subjection. One point of view of the death of Christ beyond and outside of the instruments that caused it, is, that He laid down His life in subjection: "I have received this commandment of my Father". His death was the supreme act of subjection.
One used to think that that act was the end of subjection in Christ, and that ever after it would be rule, it would be command. But, dear brethren, that is not so. Having entered into manhood, He *retains* manhood in subjection. One view of the resurrection, of His taking His life again in manhood, is, that it is done in subjection: "I have authority to lay it down and I have authority to take it again. I have received this commandment of my Father" (@John 10: 18). The commandment
{31}
covers both the laying it down and the taking it again. Commanded to take it again in resurrection, obedience to that command is expressed in His resurrection. I do not of course refer to that point we love to take account of, that it was the surpassing greatness of the power of *God* that wrought in Christ in raising Him from the dead, but there is also this view in @John 10: 18, that He took it again in subjection to a divine command.
Our thoughts and our hearts would go to the passage we read in @1 Corinthians 15. His present position is "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool"; sit there till every single thing is subject to Christ. That is the mind of God for Christ at the present moment. As Pharaoh said to Joseph; "I am Pharaoh", "only in the throne, will I be greater than thou", but otherwise no one was to lift their hand or foot without Joseph. That is the position of Christ, and it will continue until everything is subject to Him. God is going to put *everything* in subjection to Christ, and when everything is subdued, when there is nothing unsubdued in the universe of God, what then? It is beyond *us* to express -- but the Spirit of God says when everything shall have been brought into subjection to Him, then "the Son also himself shall be placed in
{32}
subjection" (verse 28). We are now in our thoughts touching a little on what we have had before us -- "to eternity"; "from eternity, to eternity". That passage in @1 Corinthians 15 brings us as it were to the door of eternity. What place will the Son have in eternity? One would not dare to say it, if the Spirit of God in the Scripture did not say it, but the Son will be placed, not exactly He will *become* subject, as by His own act, though that would be true -- but He is *placed by God* in subjection. The Son, the One whom the Father loves, for "the Father loves the Son" -- that One who has made God known to our hearts is placed in subjection by God. The One whom we all love to kiss even today, for it says, "Kiss the Son": the One towards whom the holy affections of the liberated universe will yet express themselves -- of Him it says, "the Son also himself shall be placed in subjection". The underlying condition of all eternity is subjection to God: "from eternity to eternity, thou art God". Subjection will be the basic condition of the universe eternally. There is an aspect of God's kingdom that is eternal, as the apostle says, "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen" (@1 Timothy 1: 17). That will be secured to God
{33}
for ever, as the Son remains for ever in manhood, in subjection to God.
Now, if we are to get the gain of what is in the mind of God for us, there must be subjection. You can see that in the gospel of John, where the Lord comes into the time condition and scene out of eternity. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". Then further, "the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us". What will He not bring in? What will not -- such a One bring in as available to men? Who could measure it? No one. The apostle says, "for of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace" because of *Who* had come in. But who got the gain of what He brought in? Those who were subject. Take the good wine -- the joy that is never deficient, joy that will continue for ever -- who got it? Those who were subject. Mary for .the moment, beloved woman whom all generations call blessed, stepped out of the place of subjection, and said to Him, "They have no wine". She undertook to direct *Him*, but the Lord will not allow that, and she accepts the adjustment. She is a woman who can be adjusted, and she says, "Whatever he may say to you, do". That is subjection. The Lord says, "Fill the waterpots with water",
{34}
and they filled them. "Draw out now", and they drew out. The lawless mind would have said, Why fill them with water? and, What is the use of drawing them out? But there was subjection, and the good wine was there. Beloved brethren, we only know what the good wine is, as we are subject. And so in chapter 4, the nobleman's son is ill and about to die, and he comes to the Lord knowing by faith that because of who He was, He could bring in what was needed, and the Lord says, "Go thy way, thy son liveth"; and we read that he went his way. There was subjection, and healing flows from subjection. If there are conditions that require healing, and there are such everywhere -- Healing comes in where there is subjection. In chapter 6, where it is a question of food, you have the same principle coming to light. Five thousand men are there, and what does the Lord say? "Make the men sit down". There is acceptance in subjection of what the Lord says, and the food comes; it comes where there is subjection. In chapter 9, you have the same principle. There is a man born blind and in darkness, but the Lord makes clay and puts it on his eyes, and says to him, "Go, wash in the pool of Siloam" which is, "Sent", and the man went, and washed, and came seeing. Does not that touch
{35}
the question why some of us do not see? Someone recently said, As long as I live I will not accept that -- speaking in regard to light the Lord had given. Could he ever see? Never; till there is subjection, but where there is that, the light will come. It involves subjection not only to the Lord, but as Peter says, "Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder" (@1 Peter 5: 5). That does not refer merely to years, but to those who have known God longer and better than we. The word is to submit, and light comes where there is subjection. Peter goes on to say, "Yea, all of you be subject one to another", and that is a basic condition for light to come. The Lord said, "Go," and the man says, "I went;" the Lord said, "Wash," and he says, "I washed and do see;" there was subjection.
Again just one more word. The Lord Jesus appears at the grave of Lazarus. Mary and Martha, with a right sense of what such a One as John's gospel presents, could do, sent for Him, but the Lord remained where He was two days -- deliberately allowing the condition to fully manifest itself, and then He went. He comes to the grave, and there was a stone upon it, and the Lord says, Take away the stone. Martha says, No, do not allow the
{36}
awful condition there to be manifest; hide it. But the Lord says, "Take away the stone," and it says, "They took therefore the stone away." Where darkness and corruption have been, life and incorruptibility are brought to light. It is life out of death, only known where there is subjection. We cannot have living conditions without subjection. How often we are like Martha, we shrink from allowing the Lord to uncover or have uncovered, the condition which exists, and which He knows better than we do, but if He uncovers the conditions, it is but to manifest His power, when there is subjection.
May the Lord help us all, not only to accept the principle of subjection as ordained of God for us -- but that we may *love* it, as seeing its beauty and perfection in Christ, and as knowing it is to continue through all eternity -- the eternity that is before us. Subjection to God will remain unbroken throughout all eternity, but we will get the gain of what is eternal *now*, in the measure in which we are prepared to be subject. May the Lord thus help us.
{37}
THE FULNESS OF THE GODHEAD
@Colossians 2: 8 - 10
One has been impressed (luring the afternoon with the word we get in this epistle, that there is a sphere where there is neither Greek nor Jew, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but where Christ is everything and in all. That land must indeed be as the scripture says, "a land that is very far off" from this world. "Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: they shall behold the land that is very far off" (@Isaiah 33: 17), meaning that the moral distance is great between this world and the land where Christ is everything; it is far off. It is manifest that Christ is not everything in this world; when He was in the world, the princes of this world crucified the Lord of glory. "He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not" (@John 1: 10). So that He was cast out as worthless by men, "the stone which the builders rejected"; there is no place for Him in the structure of this world, the builders rejected that Stone. So that there is one name that always seems out of place in this world, the name of Jesus. That name is always out of place; you can mention any other name, that of the wickedest man that lives today, or has ever lived, and it does not disturb the atmosphere, but the name of Jesus does not fit anywhere in this world.
But there is a land, as we have said, where He
{38}
is everything and in all, and I desire just to say a few words as to the greatness of that blessed Person who is great enough to be everything and in all. It says He has gone up into heaven "that he might fill all things" (@Ephesians 4: 10). That is the purpose of God, that He might fill everything in heaven and on earth. No human lips, or heart, or mind, could speak of such a One but for the presence of the Holy Ghost. The Lord Jesus said, "When He, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth ... He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you" (@John 16: 13, 14). And the confidence that one has in seeking to speak at all is that the Spirit of God is here to bring before our hearts the greatness and glory of Christ.
So when we come to the scripture, what I have to say is just wrapped up in one verse, "For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily." There is no greater expression in scripture. There are no words that can convey the profound and wondrous meaning of such a scripture, "In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily." Our tiny minds and thoughts are lost as we think of the Godhead. What thoughts, dear brethren, surround the Word, the name, the Godhead. The Apostle Paul said to some of his hearers that "We ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device." (@Acts 17: 29.) All the art of man, every device that the human mind can conceive, cannot express what the Godhead is like; it is beyond the compass of the mind of man. The witness to it is seen in the things which are made. It says the things which are seen bear witness to
{39}
"his eternal power and Godhead" (@Romans 1: 20.) So that the whole universe tells us something of the omnipotence of God, of the Godhead, His omnipotence, His unlimited and eternal power. That is one great thought connected with the Godhead, Omnipotence: the power that knows no bounds and no limits.
But then God is omniscient. His eyes are in every place, beholding the evil and the good (@Proverbs 15: 3). What human mind can compass omniscience? But God sees everything, everywhere. That is one thought of the Godhead. "The eyes of the Lord are in every place." Every eye that has ever been created is a little expression of the omniscience of God. "He that formed the eye, shall he not see?" (@Psalm 94: 9.)
Then God is omnipresent. He is everywhere. "Do not I fill heaven and earth?" (@Jeremiah 23: 24). David understood that; he said, "If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there ... if I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea; even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me." (@Psalm 139: 8 - 10). Then God, dear brethren, is love; love in its totality has its origin in God. This, and many other thoughts surround the Godhead, but the passage we have read says "all the fulness of the Godhead" -- all of it. What a wondrous statement! All of it. Everything that marks the Godhead, power, light, love, wisdom, patience, faithfulness, grace, every single thing that is proper to the Godhead, all the fulness of it, not in measure; the fulness is in contrast to the thought of measure. All the fulness, the whole entirety of what is proper to the Godhead, it says, dwells in Him bodily.
{40}
Now, I would like us to get a sense of what that word "bodily" means. You see, God is a Spirit, "Dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see to whom be honour and power everlasting." (@1 Timothy 6: 16). Scripture does speak of the form of God, but no creature has ever seen it or shall ever see it. Angels do not see it. The Seraphim, though they stand in the presence of God, have six wings; "with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly" (@Isaiah 6: 2), meaning they did not see the Person, the form, of God, not even the holy angels. But bodily means that a vessel has come into view where all that God is can be seen; the most wondrous thought in scripture that a vessel has come into view great enough to contain all the fulness of the Godhead, for it is there. It says, "bodily," meaning that in that blessed Person, the Lord Jesus Christ as man, the fulness of the Godhead dwells. So that we can take account of it as creatures, and angels can; for "God was manifest in the flesh ... seen of angels" (@1 Timothy 3: 16), that we, men and women, can feast our eyes, the eyes of our hearts, upon a blessed Vessel that contains the fulness of the Godhead; and it says it dwells there, it does not sojourn there; it is not a temporary thought, it is an eternal thought. It came into view in the entrance of Jesus into this world in the body that was prepared for Him, He took a form; He was in the form of God, which no creature knows about, but it says in the New Translation He took a bondman's form, "and was made in the likeness of men; and being found in fashion as a man." (@Philippians 2: 7, 8.) There
{41}
you have a Vessel, but that Vessel is so infinitely great that all the fulness of the Godhead dwells there. When Jesus passed through this world, there passed through it a Vessel that contained all the fulness. It is there now, the same blessed Person, for it says, the glory of God shines in the face of Jesus. (@2 Corinthians 4: 6.) The blessed Lord Jesus whom we know and love will be man throughout the eternal day. "Then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all." (@1 Corinthians 15: 28). How God is all in all through eternity is that the Lord Jesus Christ remains man, and as man He is the Vessel in which what God is finds expression for the hearts of all to feast upon, for all to drink from.
Now that is the thought running through scripture, of Him being the Fountain. I do not know that there is anything more blessed than the thought of the Fountain. There are rivers, there are brooks in scripture, but the Fountain is the source from whence everything comes; and one of the last words of the Lord to us is, "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give unto him that is athirst of the *fountain* of the water of life freely." (@Revelation 21: 6). You can understand, in the light of what we have been saying, that He must be the Fountain of everything that the soul needs. Everything for every heart, everything for the whole church, everything for all men must find its source in Him; He is the Fountain from whence everything comes that is good. Men today, as the word says, spend their strength for nought. They are hewing out those broken cisterns which hold no water, and are forsaking the Fountain of living waters. In turning away from Christ,
{42}
Christendom turns away from the Fountain and there is no other. Every other cistern is broken and holds no water at all according to God, but the Fountain from whence everything that is good comes is the Lord Jesus Christ, and it must be so when we remember that all that God is, in every single feature of it, dwells in Him bodily.
Now, one's thoughts turn to the first chapter of John's gospel in order that we might take account a little of the Lord Jesus as the Vessel, the great and blessed Vessel in which what God is resides. And so it says, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." And it tells us that "the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us." (@John 1: 1, 14). There is the thought of "bodily." "The Word became flesh" -- a Vessel appears -- "and dwelt among us." And John says, "Of his fulness have all we received." (verse 16). As he thinks of it, he thinks of every saint, every Christian that has ever lived, drinking out of His fulness. "Of his fulness have all we received."
Now, in describing, as he does in the first and second chapters, some of the fulness that was there, he touches upon this, "In him was life." That is one great feature of the fulness of the Godhead. God is the living God, the living and true God. "He is not a God of the dead, but of the living." (@Luke 20: 38). One great feature of the Godhead is life, and so when John speaks of the Lord Jesus becoming man, he says, "In him was life." That is, life as an essential principle resided there. It does not reside in you and me like that; by the power of God we have been made living souls. The breath of God has given us life, but life as a
{43}
principle does not dwell in us; we have been made living souls, but life is eternally in Jesus. "In him was life." So that if anybody wants life, the Vessel of life is available to men. He is the Vessel in which life is. That was the point at the grave of Lazarus. The One in whom life is came down to that grave, and necessarily death had to give place if you have the One in whom life is. So it says, "He has given to the Son to have life in himself." (@John 5: 26). No one ever gets life for their souls except from Christ. He is a life-giving Spirit. "The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam a life-giving Spirit." He can say to Martha, "I am the resurrection and the life." (@John 11: 25.) He came down as the life, and death vanished, although Lazarus had been dead four days.
So when Peter and John came to the sepulchre the great stone had been rolled away and the angel sat on it; and the garments of death were folded up and laid aside, the napkin that was about His head in a place by itself. The One in whom life is had been into death, and death fled; as the word said, "What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back?" (@Psalm 114: 5).
Then the Apostle John moves on. "The life was the light of men." (@John 1: 4). "And the light" -- *the* light! Now we have the Vessel of light; first the Vessel of life. Wonderful thought! None of the scientific men on the earth are vessels of life; but Jesus is the One in whom life is, and the life Giver. Then we have the Vessel of light. It says, "The light shineth in darkness." Another great thought of God's fulness is God is light. "God is light, and in him is no darkness at all." (@1 John 1: 5).
{44}
Darkness never enters where God is. He dwells, it says, "in unapproachable light." (@1 Timothy 6: 16 New Trans.). But when Jesus appeared in this world the Vessel in whom the light was appeared, and the light shone in the darkness; as it says, "The people which sat in darkness saw a great light." (@Matthew 4: 16.) The great luminary shone in the Person of Jesus. That was what blind Bartimaeus needed. The great luminary that brings light to men's souls was passing by, and the result was he saw, and the light came into his soul; the light shone in the darkness. If souls want light from God there is the Vessel of light come within view of our souls in Jesus. There is no light anywhere else. The light that Christendom had is rapidly becoming darkness, and scripture says, "How great is that darkness." And the kingdom of the beast is full of darkness; but the Vessel of light is Jesus.
Then John goes on, "We beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." The glory of an only One with a Father. What does that mean? As it says further on, "The only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father." It means this, dear brethren, that what dwelt in that wonderful Vessel is the fulness of love. Life, light, love, dwell in the blessed Vessel that John speaks of that became flesh and dwelt among us. So the Apostle Paul says, I am persuaded that nothing can "separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." (@Romans 8: 38, 39). The boundless heart of the blessed God is there; it is "in Christ Jesus our Lord." That is where the love is; it is where the life and the light are, but it is where
{45}
the love is. The love in its totality dwells in the Person of Jesus. How John loved to speak of that. All through the gospel he says of himself, "the disciple whom Jesus loved." That is, he had been to the fountain of love; he had been to the Vessel in which the heart of God dwelt. As we have observed, one would like the sweetness of it to come to each heart here. It says, "Jesus loved Martha." Oh, if the blessedness of that could get hold of each Christian in this room, that in the Person of Jesus the Fountain of love is open to me! "Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus." (@John 11: 5). Each one of them had come with their tiny vessel and dipped into the fountain of love. Every Christian has done that to some extent. A beloved brother has said in one of his poems, "My thimble of need will ne'er drain the ocean." He had the Fountain before him, and whatever our need, life, light or love, our thimbles can all come and never drain the ocean. John says, "Of his fulness have all we received." It never dries up.
Then John goes on: "We beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace"; the Vessel of divine grace. Another attribute of God, another feature of the fulness is grace; "the God of all grace." (@1 Peter 5: 10). Grace is one of God's great features, part of His blessed name. God said to Moses, I will tell you My name: "The Lord, The Lord God, merciful and gracious." (@Exodus 34: 6). That is part of His name; and so the Apostle Peter says, "The God of all grace." All that grace is deposited in Jesus, full of it. Luke's gospel is the development of that; John just touches it; he says it
{46}
is there, and Luke takes it up and unfolds it in all its magnitude until you find at the end of the gospel a man who had been in this world a cumberer of the ground, a thorn and a briar, cumbering the ground, no title to be here, and the discovers at the cross the Vessel of divine grace. One in whom the grace of God dwells eternally; and he appeals to it. He brought his tiny vessel, his thimble, and it did not drain the ocean. He says, "Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom." (@Luke 23: 42.) "When thy kingdom is set up, remember me." But the grace arises in all its blessed fulness, and the Lord says to him, "‘Though you have been a cumberer of the ground, worthy to be removed, I will plant you in the paradise of God. In virtue of what I am, you will be a plant in God's paradise for ever." It was the Vessel of divine grace that spoke.
The Apostle Paul found the Lord Jesus in that way. He loved to speak of it; he himself, as he found out afterwards, a blasphemer and a persecutor; an insolent, overbearing man, chief of sinners; but he looks up and says, "I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry." (@1 Timothy 1: 12.) "And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant." (verse 14). The grace that filled that blessed Vessel overflowed. "Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound." (@Romans 5: 20). And it overflowed right down into the heart of Saul, and he drank of that grace. That is what is opened to us, all the grace of heaven has come into one blessed Vessel, and it is within your reach.
So John says, "Full of grace and truth" -- another part of the fulness. When we think of God,
{47}
what do we think about Him? That He cannot lie. God cannot lie. There is not much that God cannot do, but that is one thing. He cannot lie. God is true, says the word, "the only true God." But all the truth, all that is true, finds its eternal deposit in the Person of Jesus. If you want to know what is true you will only find it in the Vessel of truth, this blessed Vessel! It says, "Full of grace and truth": "the truth as it is in Jesus." That is where the truth is. Never mind what philosophy and vain deceit and the rudiments of this world talk about; the Vessel of truth is the Person of Jesus. "The truth as it is in Jesus." The truth about God; the truth about man; the truth about the past; the truth about the present; the truth about the future; the truth about you; the truth about every one resides in the Person of Jesus. The truth is there for you and me to dip out of, in a world where a liar is active. "He is a liar, and the father of it," says the Lord. (@John 8: 44). The blessed Vessel of truth comes into this scene, "full of grace and truth."
And so John pursues his thought into the second day and says, "I knew him not." What a wonderful expression! The world knew Him not. "He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not." And he says, "I knew him not," and "Ye know not." "There standeth one among you whom ye know not." He had come down in such a guise, in the form of a Servant, that even John "knew him not: but he that sent me to baptise with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptiseth with the Holy Ghost. And
{48}
I saw, and bare record, that this is the Son of God." That is the Vessel of the Holy Ghost. "Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining." "I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him." The Vessel of God's Holy Spirit is the Person of Jesus. The dove that had gone out from the ark of Noah and never found a place to rest, going through this death-stricken scene and finding no rest for the sole of its foot, was sent out again and plucked off an olive leaf and brought it back to the ark, gathering up in that way every bit of spiritual life that existed at the moment. Noah sent it out again, and then we do not hear any more; but the continuation of the story is, John says, "I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him."
And so the Lord Jesus as man has the Spirit of God without measure. When the Spirit of God came here to dwell in the church no one received that Spirit in its totality. He came as a mighty rushing wind. Nobody can gather up the wind; indicating the difference between the coming of the Spirit as upon us, the church, and coming upon Jesus in a bodily form. It came in its entirety and abode there, because everything was entirely suitable for the Spirit to remain there. The difference between the Spirit as fire and as a dove is wonderful. When the Holy Spirit came on believers at Pentecost, it says He came as cloven tongues of fire, meaning that in ourselves there needed to be the judgment of evil; but when it came upon Jesus, it says He came as a dove; meaning that everything is restful and complacent for the Spirit to abide there. So that if any one
{49}
wants the Spirit of God, the Lord says, "If any man thirst, let him come unto me." (@John 7: 37). That is where the Spirit is available. "Speak to the rock," the Lord said to Moses, and the waters flowed. It is consequent on the smiting. That is where the Spirit is available: in Jesus. The apostle says, "I want a supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ," and the deposit is in this wonderful Vessel in all its fulness.
Now, there is one more word I want to mention. God says, "I have laid help upon one that is mighty." (@Psalm 89: 19.) Another great feature of God is that He is our Helper. The saint says, "Hitherto hath the Lord helped us." (@1 Samuel 7: 12). Help is one of God's great features, that He is prepared to help men, and it says, "I have laid help upon one that is mighty." That is, the help that every man, woman, and child, every believer wants is laid, it is put there, in the Vessel of divine help for men. An outcast woman, a dog in her public position, discovered that. She kneeled down and said, "Lord, help me." (@Matthew 15: 25; @Mark 7: 25.) There is always an answer to that. Help is there, laid by God on One that is mighty. Paul had access to that Vessel of help. "Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day." (@Acts 26: 22). What a wonderful Vessel! There is much more. Who can speak of all the fulness of the Godhead? But I suggest these things that we should get a glimpse in our souls of the greatness of the Vessel -- "bodily" -- the fulness abides there.
Now there is another work going on at the present moment. It says that Solomon, the man of glory, the man of wisdom, the man of power, cast in the clay ground in the plains of Jordan
{50}
vessels of bright brass for the temple of God. (@2 Chronicles 4: 16, 17). You see, what is coming is this: after this great and blessed Vessel has been introduced that I have been speaking about, there is another vessel. John speaking of it says, I saw "the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God." (@Revelation 21: 10, 11 New Trans.). Another most wonderful thing! a vessel now in view that has the glory of God; and it is not Christ personally this time, but it is the holy city, and it has the glory of God.
What God is shines out of that wonderful city. How is that made up? It is made up of all those vessels of bright brass that Solomon cast in the clay ground being brought together. Solomon is Christ in heaven, in glory, using His power and wisdom in our earthly circumstances. They form the clay ground, the mould, that which is capable of receiving the glory; as the Apostle Paul says, "vessels of glory"; "vessels of mercy ... prepared unto glory." (@Romans 9: 23). That is how the city is built: by all these vessels that have been the subject of Christ in His blessed power and wisdom, using the earthly circumstances through which we pass as a mould to form vessels of bright brass. That means what is contrary to God must be refused. The Lord is using our earthly circumstances and the things we have to face and pass through in the clay ground on the plains of Jordan, where death may come in at any minute, to be a means to form by His wonderful skill a vessel which will refuse that which is not of God., and which will contain His glory.
Now the holy city is the gathering up of that.
{51}
One loves to think of it, all the vessels that will come up; they were without number which Solomon cast. Some of them are small, as it says, vessels of cups; others are larger, vessels of flagons; but they are all coming up; they are all going to have their place in the holy city. Peter is a vessel there that has been formed; John that leaned on Jesus¬ bosom; Bartholomew, Thaddaeus, Paul, Stephen -- you can see the glory shining out from the very clay ground which he is in. The glory of God shone out through the human vessel, that mould, even before he was taken home, and all the people of God in whom there has been a work of God's blessed Spirit, small and great, gathered together in a vessel which has the glory of God.
Now your part and mine in that wonderful scene will depend on our maintaining access to this great and blessed Vessel. If we turn away to philosophy and the thoughts of men, and the traditions of this world, we close up for ourselves the access to the Vessel in whom all the fulness of the Godhead dwelleth bodily. "And ye are complete in him." That is, you do not want anything else. The thought of being complete is that there is no need for anything else. As our little vessels are filled from that wonderful Fountain, our measure to contribute to that glorious city is being formed.
I have sought to present a little bit of the greatness of the One who fills all in the land of God's purpose, so that we might hasten towards that blessed goal. "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God." (@Colossians 3: 1). The earth or the wilderness is not the goal, but
{52}
where Christ is. "Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth." Our affections find an object in the One in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwells bodily.
{53}
DIVINE MEASUREMENT
@Genesis 1: 14 - 19; @Revelation 20: 1 - 8
There is one attribute of God that I have enjoyed in recent times, namely, that He is "the God of measure," @2 Corinthians 10: 13. His ability to measure things is one of His attributes. He has many other attributes, all contributing to His glory. He is the God of glory, the God of patience, the God of hope, the God of recompenses. He is also the God of measure, and we cannot challenge His measurements. He measures by distance, He measures by weight, He measures by time. His ability to measure distances baffles the human mind, as seen in the physical universe, and all such measurements are perfect. His ability to measure by weight is perfect. He is said to have weighed the mountains, and to have measured the waters in the hollow of His hand, @Isaiah 40: 12; He measured how much water would be suitable on this globe. He weighs actions on His balances, @1 Samuel 2: 3. He even weighs the spirits of men, @Proverbs 16: 2, so perfect are His balances.
I refer now to God's ability to measure time, for I believe, if we receive this feature of His glory into our hearts, we shall be calm in view of what confronts us. God's glory is seen, amongst many other ways, in His wonderful ability to measure time. These scriptures begin the subject and end it, but I want to draw upon our knowledge of the Scriptures to refer to others as we proceed.
The first scripture indicates that God measures the seasons and the days and the years. In establishing the great luminaries that rule above, God said, "Let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years." God has determined how long a day will be, how long a night will be, how long a month will be, how long a season will be, and how long a year will be. All are fixed from heaven and are outside man's range to alter. God measured them and no one could challenge the perfection of such measurements. The ordinances of the heavens whereby they rule over the earth have fixed the day. We cannot shorten or lengthen it. They have fixed the month -- the moon determining the month -- they have fixed the seasons and they have fixed the year.
I mention this to show that God has power and uses it to control time and measure it. Now if He has done that in the physical universe, will He stand aside and ignore time in
{54}
the working out of things here on earth? Never! If He has controlled time in establishing the creation as we now have it, do you think He stands back and has no say in the times that pass over us? He took account of the times that passed over David and the times that passed over Israel, @1 Chronicles 29: 30, and He controls and takes cognisance of the times that pass over His people now. We see this in relation to man in his departure from God in the days of Noah. There was a world in defiance of God, filled with corruption and violence. God fixes the time for that world at 120 years. He says to Noah, "My spirit shall not always strive with man ... but his days shall be an hundred and twenty years," @Genesis 6: 3. God measures the time that He will allow such a world to continue, one hundred and twenty years. Will He not do that now?
He certainly will. Let us not think that things will go on and on. God has fixed the time for the end. Here in Genesis He fixed, not only the year, but the day. The day Noah went into the ark was the seventeenth of the second month of the six hundredth year of Noah's life. It was fixed, and on that same day the windows of heaven were opened and the fountains of the great deep broken up. It is all so determined from heaven.
We see that working out again in another way; the period of the persecution of God's people in Egypt is fixed. God told Abraham that his seed would go down into a land not theirs and be persecuted four hundred years, @Genesis 15: 13. The period that He would permit His people to be afflicted in the world was fixed by God. He determined that. Will He not do that now? He certainly will. He will fix the time He will permit the world to afflict His people, as He did then. Four hundred years, He says, and you can trace it out. When the four hundred years are up, the power of Egypt is broken and His people are delivered. All is in His hands as to time. The same principle operates as to the seven years of plenty and the seven years of famine in Joseph's day. God in His wisdom measures the time of plenty; and then He measures the time of famine. All is controlled by Him. The dreams that Pharaoh received indicate what God is doing. God makes known to Pharaoh what He is doing during a defined period of plenty and then a defined period of famine. I do not touch what these things represent, but I point them out to help us to see how time is controlled by God.
I pass on to Numbers, and we find there that the period allotted in the wilderness is fixed by God -- forty years, a year
{55}
for a day, @Numbers 14: 33. Forty days were spent spying out the land; now they were to be in the wilderness forty years. It is clear that the period in which His people are in wilderness conditions, with all it brings upon them, is fixed by God. It is not accidental; it is not casual. It is defined from heaven. Another matter that God fixes as to time is the space for repentance -- a very grave matter for every heart. I refer to Jezebel. Scripture says, "that woman Jezebel," @Revelation 2: 20 -- the most wicked queen that has reigned. But the Lord says, "I gave her time that she should repent," @Revelation 2: 21. The Lord allotted to her a period for repentance, known to Him as to its length, but defined. She repented not. This matter has tested me and I hope it will come home to all, that heaven allots a period for repentance. We cannot say on our side exactly how long it is, but heaven fixes it. If repentance is reached within that period, thank God; but if it is not, the period is passed over to our loss. I am not speaking primarily to unbelievers. I am including each one of us in relation to any matters that need adjusting, that need repentance. There is a period in the mind of God, and if we miss it, then we may miss it for the rest of the journey. The Lord controls the time for it to be done. It is in His hands. Even be we such as Jezebel, there is space for repentance. If we pass that space, the matter is settled.
We see this principle working beautifully as to Nineveh. The prophet comes there and says, "Yet forty days," @Jonah 3: 4. God granted that space for repentance. We cannot tell how long the forty days literally may be to any one of us, but there is space for adjusting matters that are wrong. If, like the king of Nineveh, we humbly face the thing in the forty days, that is our deliverance, but if we pass over the forty days then we are as Jezebel. They went out to look for her but could not find her, for the dogs had eaten her, @2 Kings 9: 35. She fell into the hands of the unclean. I commend this matter to each of us. Each knows his own history. Why not put things right while there is time? Let it come home to our consciences and hearts. Why not put it right in the, period allotted by heaven? "I gave her space for repentance," the Lord says.
I pass on to Hezekiah, and would show that God allots us the period of our life here, a most comforting thought. The length of life of one of God's people is not accidental; the matter is in the hands of God. God, speaking to Hezekiah says, "Set thy house in order; for thou shalt die, and not
{56}
live," @2 Kings 20: 1. The time had come in God's mind to close this life. Hezekiah weeps and prays, and God grants him fifteen years. He fixes another period. He measures the extended period of Hezekiah's life. That ought to quieten our spirits whatever comes. Whatever lies before us, our lives -- the length of them here -- are in the hands of God. Let us not be dismayed, nor filled with undue fear. Let us not fear, for our breath is in the hands of God. Paul says, "the time of my release is come." This is a great solace to us all. The time is fixed by God. He can in His wisdom extend it, for in the working out of His ways, God takes account of the desires and prayers of His people, whether in lengthening a period of blessing, shortening a time of severe pressure, or deferring the moment of judgment. It is *God*, however, who measures and fixes the time.
I pass on. The period of the captivity is fixed by God seventy years. God determined the period His people would be in captivity. The end is fixed, and after seventy years God says, "I will visit you," @Jeremiah 29: 10. The period we have to go through in discipline because of our failures individually or collectively, is fixed by God. Let us humbly accept it. That is what Daniel did. He did not resist, but bowing to it accepted it humbly. He understood by books when the time was drawing near for the release of Israel. He understood what was written in Jeremiah the prophet about the seventy years.
I come now to the New Testament, where we come to this thought in a most glorious way. The day of the entrance of Christ to this earth is fixed by heaven. The angelic hosts say, "this day," @Luke 2: 11. Multitudes of the heavenly hosts join in the celebrations of that day. "Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which will be to all people. For unto you is born *this day* in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord." The day and the place were designed by heaven. God's hand overruling even the Roman census that it should be in the place, as well as on the day, of His determining -- all ordered by heaven, all measured by God.
Then, referring to the public service of Christ, we read, "when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son," @Galatians 4: 4. Oh, what a time! the *fulness* of the time. One cannot convey much of what this means, but the great outgoing of time was the public appearance of Jesus as sent here as the Son. "God sent forth his Son." The time for this was measured. "God, having raised up his servant, has
{57}
sent him, blessing you," @Acts 3: 26. Then the duration of the Lord's public service was measured. It was all ordered from heaven. Again and again they would terminate His life, but could not. They may take Him to the brow of the hill to cast Him down headlong, but He goes His way. They may take stones to stone Him, but His hour was not yet come. The day of the death of Jesus is also fixed by heaven -- the "due time," @Romans 5: 6. I could not tell you all that enters into that word "due" -- the time measured according to the divine calendar for the great Sacrifice. They say, "Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar of the people," @Mark 14: 2. It was the day that the Passover must be killed, like the passover of which it says, "It is a night much observed," @Exodus 12: 42. The month of the passover was the beginning of months, but the "night" of the passover sacrifice was to be much remembered. So it was in due time that Christ died for the ungodly -- the time due according to divine measurements. If God had His hand over the situation at Calvary, will He not have it over the situation today? There never was anything like Calvary for lawlessness in man and for the power of the devil, but God had His hand over the whole situation, and measured it.
I now refer to several passages in the Revelation of kindred import. The Lord says to the church at Smyrna that they would have tribulation ten days. They were going to pass through a period when some would die, the Lord saying to such "be thou faithful to death, and I will give thee a crown of life ... He that overcometh, shall not be hurt of the second death," @Revelation 2: 10, 11. The Lord measures the period of tribulation, more intense perhaps than ever in Christian history, but measured by the Lord -- ten days. He fixes the period. Let us face what is ahead of us, realising that He will fix the days. He will fix the ten days. He will know how long to let it go on; He will determine when it begins and when it ends. It is not in other hands. Whoever may be the instrument causing the suffering, the period is controlled by the Lord. "Ye shall have tribulation ten days."
I refer to @Revelation 9, where out of the smoke of the pit come locusts; they are like horses; they have hair like women, teeth like lions. Their noise is like many horses and chariots running to battle. They have a sting like a scorpion, and they hurt men *five months*. This awful scourge that comes from the pit has to be gone through, but the period is determined by God -- five months. They cannot shorten it. They
{58}
look for death, but cannot find it, and the five months have to be gone through.
Then in chapter 11 the prophetic period is fixed in days, not months. There are the two prophets, and it says, "they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days," @Revelation 11: 3. Nobody can touch them till they have finished their testimony. The period in which the prophetic word is available is fixed by God, even to days. That is a great matter for us to see. We cannot lend our ear to it as we like, assuming it is always to go on: The period of the prophetic word is fixed. They are slain and their bodies lie on the street of the great city three and a half days -- the expression of the hatred of the then world for divine testimony. Its contempt for the witnesses is seen in that their bodies lie there three and a half days, the period is fixed. They cannot leave those bodies there indefinitely. God may permit His testimony to be under reproach and scorn for a period, but the period is fixed. Three and a half days, no longer, and after the three and a half days they stand up on their feet. I call attention to the fixing of the time of reproach and contempt of the saints. God knows how long He is going to allow it.
In chapter 13 the beast is seen arising out of the sea. It has a mouth like a lion, devouring; with feet like a bear, rending in pieces with unspeakable cruelty. It is like a leopard, another evidence of ferocity. It has authority to continue forty-two months, no more. The period of its power is defined, but this period is to be gone through in divine government. For forty-two months the Lamb of God moved amongst men in profound grace and blessing, only to be crucified. The world that refused Him must have forty-two months of the beast -- the same period as that wherein Jesus moved as the Lamb. "Behold the Lamb of God," said John when looking on Jesus as He walked -- no lion-like character, no bear-like character -- no leopard-like character, but the Lamb. The God of recompenses recompenses the world with forty-two months of the beast's authority, but it is limited; that is my point. It is restricted, but it continues that period and then it terminates for ever, the beast going into the lake of fire. We see that what God may permit is not out of His control. If the beast is on earth controlling the minds and hands of man, his power is restricted by heaven, forty-two months, no more and no less.
I close with the final scripture, in which there is frequent reference to one thousand years. God controls an hour or three hours -- what hours they were at Calvary, all under the
{59}
divine control! He controls one hundred and twenty years; He controls four hundred years: He adds fifteen years to a man's life; He controls ten days of tribulation; three and a half years of the beast's kingdom is limited by Him, but He is equally able perfectly to control one thousand years. One angel comes down with a great chain. The activities of evil do not mean that God has lost control. He has His angels. One of them can bind the devil; He has His chains, eternal chains indeed, not temporary ones. The angel has a great chain and it is used to bind the devil and put him in the bottomless pit for one thousand years. Year by year, one thousand years, he cannot come out. There is no weakness in the control of that time from the first year to the last. When the thousand years are completed, he must be *loosed* a little by divine order. Not that he breaks through, not that he breaks the chain, but in divine wisdom he must be loosed a little.
Then the prophet sees thrones, and those who sat upon them, who lived and reigned with Christ one thousand years. Those who have part in the first resurrection will live and reign and be priests for one thousand years. The time is allotted by God and under His control. He can allot one thousand as easily as fifteen years. He can control things for one thousand years, as He can control them for one hour. It says of Babylon, "in one hour is thy judgment come," @Revelation 18: 10. God can use one hour and one thousand years.
We pass from the thousand years into a scene to which time does not apply. Time is a creature, controlled by God from a moment to one thousand years, but when what God has in mind to do during time is finished. He brings in the new heaven and the new earth and a condition that has no need of the sun or the moon, no need for the gradations of time, be they days or months or years. We shall then have part in a condition that is eternal, abiding for the divine pleasure for ever.
I do not profess to know what God is going to permit, but I am assured of this, that the length of it remains controlled by Him, whether it be hours or days or months or years, or three and a half years, or fifteen years, or one thousand years. The matter of time is measured by God to accomplish His own purpose. May the Lord help us to be so in the acceptance of it in reality and faith that we may not be overwhelmed with care at this time.
{60}
TALKING
@Luke 24: 13 - 35; @James 1: 26, 27; @James 3: 1 - 12
One desires, dear brethren, to speak a little as to the character of the talking that goes on amongst us. It is evident that God would have us speak. When God said, "Let us make man in our image and after our likeness," every member was taken account of. Indeed, the Psalmist says, "In thy book all my members were written ... " That indicates to our minds that God took account separately of every member of the human body, so that each member has its part in forming a vessel intended of God to represent Him. I am sure that applies to all our members -- the divine intent is that man should rightly represent God. We could think and speak a great deal about the various members of our
{61}
bodies, but I wanted to speak about our speaking particularly -- our talking. "Talking" of course, is different to preaching, and it is different to teaching. "Talking" implies a mutual condition that each is free to speak; it involves that we are at liberty together. I wanted, with the Lord's help, to call attention to the necessity of having our intercourse, our conversation, controlled from heaven. There is indeed much to speak about. In Malachi, which corresponds with the day in which we are, just before the coming of the Lord, we read, "They that feared the Lord spake often one to another ... " That was not preaching, nor was it an "address." And it says, "And the Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance was written." They met together, and spoke together, not only in meetings, but in one another's houses, and the Spirit of God says that what they said was so acceptable to the Lord, that He hearkened and heard. That is in the days at the end of Israel's history, and it is what the Lord wants today -- that in our intercourse when
{62}
we meet and talk together, there is something heaven can value, something acceptable in heaven.
It is continued beautifully in Luke -- it says of certain who had the light of the coming in of Christ, and who had some conception of His supreme greatness, that these things were the subject of conversation of those who dwelt in the hill country. There had been an exodus from the low moral condition of the world, the religious world included. They had come to live in the hill country; they *lived* there, and these things were the subject of their conversation -- the coming of Christ, the preparation of His way so that He would be suitably received. What a theme, what holy conversation! We get some of the conversation recorded verbatim; Mary's conversation with Elizabeth is wonderful.
It is one of the things in the book of remembrance, the holy utterances of Mary to Elizabeth in Elizabeth's house. This is for our instruction. What sort of conversation goes on in our houses? Mary says, "My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit
{63}
hath rejoiced in God my Saviour."
And then she goes on to speak of the coming of Christ, and how He is going to put down the high and exalt the lowly, fill the hungry and send the rich away empty. These are the themes of conversation in the hill country.
Well, then, dear brethren, you see that continued in @Luke 24. There are those two on the journey to their own home from Jerusalem, and "talking." They talked; God's word tells us they talked -- they had something to say, and they talked, and the Lord draws near and says, "What are these communications which ye have one to another?" What are they? A very right question for us! You have two brothers walking together anywhere; you have two sisters, or more; let the Lord come in and say, "What are these communications?" What do we talk about? What is the subject of our conversation? They tell Him, "Concerning Jesus of Nazareth" That is the subject. Maybe they needed enlightenment, but their conversation is concerning Him, and then He goes on
{64}
with them and He talks to them. They say, "Did not our hearts burn within us as He talked with us by the way?" It was not a meeting like this -- it was simply the three of them -- the blessed Lord with them, walking along the road talking to them, and they said, "Our hearts burned within us." What did He talk to them about? He said, "Ought not Christ to have suffered these things?" He spoke about the sufferings of Christ. Dear brethren, let us speak about them. I appeal to each one and to all, brothers or sisters, if you meet together what do you talk about? You say, "What is there to talk about?" The sufferings of Christ. He spoke of them; He said, "Ought not Christ to have suffered these things?" What a theme -- the sufferings of Christ! Shall we ever exhaust them? Shall we weary of hearing of them? Never, to all eternity! The range of them, who can tell? The sufferings of Christ, how varied they were! How intense they were! How fathomless they were! But the Lord talked to them about them. And then it says,
{65}
"Ought not Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory?" It makes you feel ashamed to think of the things we talk about sometimes. When the Lord joined these two He talked about His sufferings and His glory. Who will ever come to the end of the glory? The glory of that blessed Person is a theme for all eternity, as well as His sufferings.
And it says, "He began at Moses." There are the Scriptures, precious Scriptures! God is endearing the Scriptures to the hearts of the saints in a most intense way, at the end, as the second Epistle to Timothy would confirm. The Lord takes the Scriptures from Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms, and expounds to them from the Scriptures the things concerning Himself. These were the subjects of the holy conversation, the talking -- mutual talking. What was the source of this speaking? It was in heaven. And it burned! It burned within their hearts. It was a fire originating in heaven, and it warmed
{66}
their hearts as He talked with them by the way.
So the Lord continued for forty days assembling with them and speaking to them concerning the kingdom. That is a wonderful thing, literally I mean, for the Lord to sojourn here forty days after His resurrection and assemble with them and speak to them. They heard Him speak to them concerning the kingdom of God. That is another theme to speak about -- the kingdom of God. His everlasting kingdom, where God's sway, God's rule is recognised. It makes the kingdoms of this world and the glory of them look small. The Lord assembled with them forty days and spoke about the kingdom of God. What He could tell them about it! It reminds one of Elijah and Elisha. After Elijah crossed the Jordan, having shown to Elisha that he had authority over that river in that he smote it with his mantle and the waters divided, and having the light in both their hearts that the Lord would take Elijah to heaven, they
{67}
went on and talked. Elisha is in the company of a man who is going to heaven and he knows it. After they two crossed the Jordan they went on and talked. It does not say what they talked about, but we may be sure it was wondrous conversation. Those "talkings" are recorded in heaven, undoubtedly. Here is a man who was so acceptable to God that He *would* take him to heaven. He *would* take Elijah to heaven, nothing in the universe would stop Him. Elijah knows it and Elisha knows it, and they went on and talked. That is the kind of talking we want, dear brethren -- talking related to what is the other side of death.
Then on the Mount of Transfiguration we have the same thing. There appeared Moses and Elias, who talked with Jesus of His decease which He should accomplish. They appeared and talked with Him -- suggesting, I have no doubt, that as one of the occupations of eternity. They appeared in glory; it is a scene of glory, it does not belong to earth. They talked with Him. It is wonderful to
{68}
think of the mutuality that will exist in eternity between Christ and His own. We shall be able to talk with Him. It implies that He is going to speak. One would present that to our hearts as something that is going on for ever, the mutuality of intercourse with Christ. We can draw near and talk to Him -- it is true He will talk to us -- but we are going to talk to Him.
Well, I believe that brings before our hearts the conversations that God would have marking His people. It tells us the themes worthy of talking about -- the Scriptures, the sufferings of Christ, the glory that should follow, the kingdom of God -- these are the themes of the hill country, they are the subjects of conversation in the hill country. I wanted us to see that before I touched on James, where we have the other side.
James says, "If any man seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue ... this man's religion is vain." It is empty. James recognises, dear brethren, that the tongue has to be controlled. He goes on to say that naturally it is uncontrollable.
{69}
Every species of animal, of birds, of serpents even, has been tamed, but the tongue can no one tame. Do not let us think that means we are to go on giving rein to our lawless tongues. God has come in for the Christian and given him a new tongue. You remember when the hundred and twenty were together, the whole christian company being represented, there appeared cloven tongues as of fire and sat on each of them. That is to say they are each, to have a new tongue. The old tongue is worthless, they are to have a new tongue marked by holiness, marked by discrimination, a tongue in the power of the Spirit of God. So Paul, speaks of words which the Holy Ghost teaches, communicating spiritual things by spiritual means -- by the power of the Holy Ghost.. So we approach James in the recognition that God has given the believer a tongue marked by holiness, by discrimination. One's religion is vain unless the tongue is bridled. We cannot rub that out of Scripture, and we would not. "If any man seem to be religious, and
{70}
bridleth not his tongue ... that man's religion is vain." I would beseech all of us to face the reality of this as far as our natural tongues are concerned -- if our tongues are uncontrolled our religion is empty. There is a sphere where we can speak freely -- the holy talking we have been looking at -- there is no need to bridle one's tongue there. But, dear brethren, in regard to what marks us naturally, it is imperative that the tongue should be bridled.
James goes on to show the awful place the, tongue has in nature. It sets on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire of hell. Put that in contrast to @Luke 24. There is a fire that makes the hearts of those two burn as He talked with them. Here is another fire that has its origin in hell and sets on fire the course of nature. One has its origin in heaven, the other has its origin in hell. Let us, dear brethren, face this matter -- when we come together, when brothers meet to talk, when sisters meet in their homes to talk together (and God intends them to talk), is the conversation
{71}
energised from heaven or from hell? You say, "You are speaking to Christians." I know it. So is James. That is the position -- what we talk about either has its origin in heaven and warms the hearts of Christians and attaches them to Christ, or it has its origin in hell and sets on fire the course of nature. Which is it? I speak practically. Sisters love to come together to talk -- God would put this exercise before you and all of us. Is what we say energised from heaven or from hell? One has been made to feel painfully of late how the Lord has been grieved, and the liberty of the Spirit interfered with by what we have been talking about. When things that are evil come to light, alas, amongst the people of God, the tendency is that they become the subject of conversation. I know they must be spoken about at times, and the Apostle tells us how to speak of them -- "I tell you even weeping. They are the enemies of the cross of Christ." If there is something dishonouring to the Lord in the behaviour of a brother or a sister that has
{72}
to be spoken about, let us tell it weeping. Let us not spread it. For love would always seek to cover, not to expose. Divine love never exposes anything unnecessarily. If it has to be spoken about, it is spoken of in tears, and if there is reproof necessary it is face to face. I would earnestly appeal to all that if you feel you have been wronged, see the brother or sister face to face before you say one word to anybody on earth. That is the divine way. Have not one word to say to anybody on earth till you have seen the brother or sister face to face. That is how Paul did it. Peter acted in a way that was not transparent -- Paul calls it dissimulation. But Paul withstood him to the face. How much sorrow has come in through talking behind the scenes, talking in our own homes, and when we meet together; when we have never said a word face to face with the brother or sister. And if what we have said is right, if it is true, there are many things that are true which are not necessary to repeat. Love does not do that. Love finds every possible
{73}
means to cover, not to expose, and if the thing is wrong and has to be spoken about, the Apostle says, "I tell you weeping." I would earnestly commend that to each one of us, because one knows that there is often lack of liberty in the presence of the Lord through things being talked about -- subjects of conversation unsuitable to the people of God.
The conversation that marked the hill country -- let us go on with that right to the end. The conversation on the road to Emmaus -- yes, let us go on with, that, and the Lord will join us. The conversation on the Holy Mount, as they talk of His departure -- a vast field to speak about there. The conversation as to the blessed One whom God would take to heaven -- He *would* take Him. He was so delightful to heaven He *would* take Him and set Him at His own right hand. Speak of Him as often, as freely as we have power to do so; but let us keep more definitely before our hearts that there is another kind of talking that marks the natural tongue which is untameable and hopeless.
{74}
Let our conversation be in the power of the Holy Spirit. I believe that is what underlies the Spirit coming in tongues of fire -- fire representing divine holiness, and as cloven, discrimination. God has given to the believer the capacity to speak and talk -- let it be the talk proper to the hill country. I believe the hill country is coming to light at the end of this dispensation. Many believers are moving definitely towards it to live there, to be there when the Lord comes -- to have a moral and spiritual elevation at the end suitable for the coming in of Christ. One would suggest that we take this up with God, moving to the hill country, and as moving there to see that these things are the subject of our conversation.
