{#PURITY}
{4}
NOTE BY THE “MINISTRY FOR THE DIFFICULT LAST DAYS” PUBLISHER
On page 29 the idea is submitted that the 12 tribes of Israel would represent to us spiritually the local assemblies in the Church. If we begin to draw such conclusions from the Scriptures, we have to pursue them all the way. In the Scriptures the 12 tribes were instructed not to intermarry, lest their inheritance and distinctiveness be lost. If we spiritualize this as well, we end up with memberships in local assemblies. (Exactly this line of carnal reasoning has been put to the writer by a member of the Tight Brethren to justify their God opposing autonomous local assembly principles and the memberships within them.) It is for this reason that we have to refuse that particular line of thought. We think very highly of the ministry of W.J.H., and it is for that very reason that we republish his writings, but we are still enjoined to “prove all things; hold fast that which is good.” Even a W.J.H. could be carried away with his own reasonings and the errors of his party. We do not read in the Scriptures that Christ “loves local assemblies and would each have maintained in its own distinctive character;” but it is written, “Christ loved the Church and gave Himself for it.” Such reasoning is the outcome of a very subtle type of collective self -- centeredness and such teaching will inevitably lead in a partisan direction. Also, there is in the ministry of W.J.H. (as in the ministry of other Exclusives) some optimistic notion that God, at the end of church history, will have some local assemblies that are in accord with the mind and ways of God. Of course, W.J.H. had in mind the line of meetings he belonged to. (Just as all the different lines of Exclusives have, not the whole Church, but their line of meetings as the centre of all their thoughts and reasonings.) The exceptional ruin and failure of that particular line of meetings, the extreme upheavals within the party, the errors, the spiritual deviations, and the cult mentality that have developed out of that specific line of things, should by now have destroyed any illusions or high opinions that those Brethren had about themselves and their much vaunted “Testimony”. Their views about the final condition of the Church at the Lord’s coming for His people should by now be more in line with the plain and not so promising statements found in the unerring Word of God.
{5}
PURITY
@1 Peter 2: 1 -- 5; @James 1: 26, 27; @Revelation 21: 18 -- 27
W.J.H. I have suggested these scriptures that we might consider from them what is pure. Some of us were speaking last night of the importance of the mind being sealed as God’s property, and the Apostle says amongst other things “Whatsoever things are pure ... think on these things” (@Philippians 4: 8); our minds are to be engaged in what is pure. It is, of course, a very great subject, but it occurred to me that we might be helped to speak a little on the thought of the pure mental milk, pure food for the mind in the first passage; and then the thought of pure religion in the second; and finally the thought of pure gold in the city, and in the street in the third, seen there as the great issue of the purifying work of God. The thought has come into one’s mind as feeling, with the rest of the brethren, the appalling increase of corruption marking the closing days. Corruption marked the world prior to its judgment in the days of Noah, and prior to the destruction of Sodom in the days of Abraham, and prior to the departure from Egypt in the days of Moses. The end of
{6}
every great period of human history has been marked by appalling corruption publicly, and, we would be blind not to see it now in a way that is heart-breaking, for carnal corruption, indeed every kind of corruption has increased, and what is needed by the saints is to accept the purifying of the word constantly.
J.H. In the 3rd chapter Peter speaks of “pure conversation;” he makes a great point of conversation through the whole epistle.
W.J.H. At the close of Malachi the Lord is seen as a refiner’s fire and as fuller’s soap, indicating a special feature of His word at the end. The fire is to eliminate the dross that is in all of us, and the soap to wash out what is unclean, so that He might have offerings acceptable to God as of old. I am confident we must submit ourselves to a much greater intensity of the refiner’s fire and a much greater activity of the fuller’s soap ere the Lord comes than perhaps we have thought.
J.S.B. Would you say there is that which precedes the desire for the pure mental milk, the laying aside of what is evil as mentioned in the passage read.
W.J.H. If these evil things are fed on, they destroy the appetite for what is pure. These things represent moral elements that must be laid aside so as to make room for the instinctive longings, for pure milk so
{7}
proper to a babe.
W.C.B. Is it somewhat akin to Paul’s ministry on that line in @Romans 7, “I myself with the mind serve God’s law”?
W.J.H. Yes. What has been made clear there is that he has reached a point when his mind is not controlling him but he is controlling his mind, and not allowing it to run hither and thither. The first scripture suggests initial food for the mind. In the New Translation it is “pure mental milk.” I am sure those of us who are a little older are feeling increasingly for our younger brethren who are of necessity about to face, or are already facing, the company of godless persons. Some are appalled by the corruption in language and ways beyond what they knew existed -- a veritable Sodom, but what will save them and us is that our minds are feeding on what is pure, “that by it ye may grow up to salvation.”
G.McK. You spoke of three great periods marked by corruption. What did you mean when you referred to the days before Moses led Israel out of Egypt?
W.J.H. Before their deliverance Egypt stank and was corrupted by reason of the frogs and flies, all typical of the moral conditions today before our actual exodus from the world.
R.A. Does manna suggest the pure mental
{8}
milk of the word?
W.J.H. You certainly get the thought of purity in it, for the Spirit of God says it was white. It was also small and round, but it was white.
R.A. I was thinking of it in contrast to what you have said marked Egypt. Egypt stank, and they came out of it into the wilderness and were nurtured by the manna.
W.J.H. Quite so. Manna would produce purity. It was like coriander seed. The thought of seed involves inherent power to reproduce itself. Those who feed on manna become small and round, or even, they are not depressed and silent in the meetings for weeks and weeks and then suddenly active. What marks the manna is roundness. The last feature is “white,” that is, purity.
F.W.W. Does purity suggest the work of God in the soul which may be contaminated by the flesh within or the world without?
W.J.H. Surely, and is seen in its full result in the Holy City where all is pure. The Lord by His service to His own would eliminate everything else from our ways and associations, our books and our behaviour generally, and from our spirits. He would have all that is impure eliminated by self-judgment.
W.C.B. The apostle Peter speaks of being born again of incorruptible seed, and the
{9}
desire of the Apostle was that they should answer to it.
W.J.H. Quite so. “Thy word is very pure” (@Psalm 119: 140). This incorruptible seed is the word of God and that is very pure. There is not a trace of anything in the word of God but what is not only not corrupted but cannot be corrupted.
J.W. Would not the consideration of @Psalm 119 greatly help us on this line? “Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking heed thereto according to thy word” (verse 9). The whole Psalm is a consideration of the purity and perfection of the word of God.
W.J.H. In that connection we are more indebted than we know to the frequent occasions we come under the influence of the Word. The increase of the comings together would help to counteract the increase of corruption in the world and is one of the divine ways of cleansing us, “washing of water by the word” (@Ephesians 5: 26).
C.D. Peter shows the only way a constitution is formed that will stand. It is emphasised intensely -- “Desire earnestly the pure mental milk of the word that by it ye may grow up to salvation.”
W.J.H. Quite so. Just as in a babe, pure milk results in its steady increase until the child grows up.
{10}
C.D. It has a constitution in view.
W.J.H. Surely, and that is what is seen in the next section; the Spirit of God introduces the thought of a stone; something permanent has resulted from the pure mental milk, which becomes part of the house of God and also has part in priestly service.
F.W.W. You would hardly speak of purifying the unconverted, there is nothing pure there to bring to light.
W.J.H. That touches a very solemn matter, the nearer we get to the end the more fixed everything is, so that the Lord says, “Let him that does unrighteously do unrighteously still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still” (@Revelation 22: 11). We are drawing near to a time when things are fixed.
L.G.L. The last chapter of 2 Chronicles is on that line, “there was no remedy” -- a fixed condition.
W.J.H. If the mind is open to what is impure and we come together to the Supper and for prayer, such are not available as priests. I fear from one’s observation that some of us read things that are impure, damaging thus our growth, and the consequence is that such are silent when the spiritual sacrifices are to be offered.
V.D. You include what is religious in character -- one of the worst kinds of impurity.
W.J.H. Indeed. I suppose the spiritual
{11}
Sodom is worse than the carnal one in the sight of God but both are to be guarded against; the world today is marked by both features of Sodom.
R.A. Is it not important to remember that in @2 Timothy 2, when it says “Follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace” it is “with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart”?
W.J.H. Yes. The heart is the seat of the affections and the affections are pure, they are not mixed. There is a wonderful supply of the purest milk for the youngest believer and the result of feeding on it is growth, and it will not be long before such are beginning to take part in the meetings in a priestly way.
A.B.J. I wondered if David in @Psalm 51 supplies us with the exercise that realises what impurity is and turns to God about it. “Purge me with hyssop and I shall be clean ... and renew a right spirit within me.” This would be salvation surely.
W.J.H. The Psalmist wished to be purged, which is a very strong word, but purged with hyssop. Hyssop means that he has become small; the acknowledgment of sin makes us small and that results in cleansing. “Purge me with hyssop and I shall be clean; wash me and I shall be whiter than snow” @Psalm 51: 7). Where there have been
{12}
sinful actions hyssop is required for cleansing. Some assume to be clean without the hyssop.
C.D. He begins with that but ends with the walls of Jerusalem -- “Build thou the walls of Jerusalem.”
W.J.H. So that he is now engaged with the centre of divine interests moving away from himself.
C.D. Realising the importance of the walls.
A.G.F. What did you say was the significance of the hyssop?
W.J.H. Confession of wrong involves becoming small in one’s own eyes. Some would be clean without confessing their wrong, but one of the divine ways of cleansing is to purge us with hyssop. Hyssop in scripture represents what is small, and it is in acknowledgment of the thing to God if it is in relation to God, and to one another if it relates to one another, that cleansing takes place, because acknowledgment produces humility.
A.G.F. It is very humbling to confess things.
W.J.H. It makes us small in our own eyes, and that cleanses us because the allowance of the opposite has defiled us.
C.D. So Job says “I abhor myself.”
W.J.H. Yes, as seeing God. I believe it
{13}
is important instruction that one of the means of cleansing is hyssop -- “Purge me with hyssop and I shall be clean.”
C.D. That involves the inwards, does it not?
W.J.H. Surely. I become, small in my inward thoughts of myself.
R.H.G. Is that what the Apostle had in mind by the obedience to the truth? “Having purified your souls by obedience to the truth” (@1 Peter 1: 22).
W.J.H. Obedience to the truth is another element for purification. The subject is large as is seen -- how wide is the range of things used to purify us! The point before us is the pure milk for our minds, and in this day of books and of broadcasting it is a great matter to definitely set ourselves to feed the mind on what is pure.
W.B. Do you link the thought of reading ministry with this in a practical way?
W.J.H. It includes that. It includes the scriptures and meetings such as this, and wherever the word of God is available.
V.T.S. It has been pointed out that we have the ability to concentrate on what you have set before us -- the mental milk of the word.
W.J.H. The very words used denote that, “Desire earnestly.” It is supposed that the newborn babe is longing for the milk.
{14}
J.H. I was wondering if Mary in @Luke 10 would illustrate what we are saying, she sat at the Lord’s feet and heard His word.
W.J.H. The word is not “heard,” she was “listening,” a much greater matter. All of us hear tonight, but whether we are all listening is another matter. The result of her listening was that she is found with something pure in @John 12, pure nard -- a pure response in her heart to Christ.
L.G.L. While every feature of the Holy City speaks of Christ in some way, it is the gathering together of what is pure in the saints.
W.J.H. That is what I thought. The issue of our being purified by many processes is that there is a City that is pure gold, including the street of the city.
L.G.L. You were going to say something about the living stones.
W.J.H. Only what has been already indicated, that as the pure mental milk is fed upon, we come to the thought of having a living part in the house of God, a living stone, built up, and we come to another thought, the “holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.”
V.T.S. Is the reverse true, if we are not offering up these spiritual sacrifices, we have not been feeding on the mental milk of the word?
{15}
W.J.H. I think that might be rightly said. If brothers are constantly silent and have nothing to offer we might well ask what have such been feeding on.
A.G.F. Do I understand you to suggest that the word includes something more than the scriptures?
W.J.H. The washing of water by the word in Ephesians is not in itself a literal reference to the scriptures, though not contrary to them. It is the flow of what comes from Christ to cleanse the saints.
J.W. Is this the way in which the prayer of the Psalmist is answered, “Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in Thy sight, O Jehovah, my Rock, and my Redeemer” (@Psalm 19: 14)?
W.J.H. I am sure that is right. We have often seen young brothers and sisters come amongst us, and have found later that they have made some remarkable progress in their knowledge of God and in their liberty to serve Him, while others have hardly moved at all. Why is this? I believe what the mind feeds upon would supply the answer in many cases.
F.W.W. We find sometimes expressions suggesting the scriptures are sufficient. They are in a certain sense, but nevertheless, God is pleased to give us a great deal in addition.
W.J.H. Surely. No doubt the scriptures form the basis of everything, for scripture
{16}
will always support what is right.
R.H.G. Was Abraham one who valued the pure mental milk of the word as he sat at his tent door ready for a divine visitation, in contrast to Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked?
W.J.H. I think that is good; Abraham bringing milk thick and sweet shows how he valued milk; indeed he even ministered to God in relation to what this means.
F.W.W. We need suitable food for the time. Sometimes you find saints confining themselves to the gospel periodicals. One questions whether they have the food suitable for the exercises of the moment. We should have an enlarged view of what is included in the word, so that in accordance with our exercises we should be desirous of having a word suitable for that position.
W.J.H. Specially at this juncture we need to decide that we will not open our minds to what is impure. I believe if we put a girdle round our minds, the Lord would help us.
L.G.L. I suppose Daniel as in the beginning of the book would represent such an one, not defiling himself with the king’s meat.
W.J.H. Quite so. And what development there was -- his flesh was fatter and fairer than that of others. He understood more than they did, in spite of their learning. He was
{17}
far wiser than any of the Chaldeans.
G.D. Would you not say we need to be careful what we take in in reading, and what we take in with our eyes?
W.J.H. Care is needed as to all that enters into the mind. It might be well to look now at the matter of pure religion, a word not often used in scripture. There is such a thing as religion, and there is pure religion, and it is not to be confined to speaking. It is pure religion. It is the religion that heaven would own, not something that is merely talk. Hence “if any man among you seem to be religious” his religiousness is to be something far more than talk.
J.S.B. Would it be instanced by those two of whom it was taken knowledge that they were with Jesus, there was that which could be taken account of?
W.J.H. I suppose the latter part of pure religion would certainly have been seen in them -- “unspotted from the world.” As having been with Jesus they would not bear the spots of the world around.
F.W.W. And it is “before God and the Father,” not exactly before men.
W.J.H. Quite so. I think the Lord would stir us up. I feel the need for more practical care for those in distress, the fatherless and the widows represent those in distress, and in sorrow and in need of comfort and
{18}
care. Pure religion is seen before God and the Father in caring for such -- not talking merely.
R.A. Is it significant for us to consider what we often lament, namely, the lack of pastoral care amongst us? Is it not a sobering thought that we feel the lack of pastoral care which what is suggested here would seem to cover, in a sense?
W.J.H. I had that in mind; compassionate, sympathetic succour and care are great features of pure religion.
F.W.W. We may relegate this service to certain ones only.
W.J.H. We may indeed. I sometimes have to ask myself has there been anything in one’s day more than speaking?
R.H.G. Is that what marked Timothy? The Apostle Paul said of him “I have no one like-minded who will care with genuine feeling how ye get on” (@Philippians 2: 20).
W.J.H. There would be more of the gift of teaching if there was more shepherding, for those two gifts are linked together.
V.D. Did they say what was quite right in Acts, “It is not right that we, leaving the word of God should serve tables” (@Acts 6: 2)?
W.J.H. We must be careful not to say more than scripture says. Afterwards this scripture brings in Stephen and Philip and calls attention to the services of these two
{19}
-- and they were of the seven that cared for widows.
C.D. Is the Father brought in here to bring in the thought of care?
W.J.H. Quite so. He is a Father to the fatherless.
Ques. Do we see that in the Lord in His compassionate movements? “The things which Jesus began both to do and to teach” (@Acts 1: 1).
W.J.H. That is very good.
J.W. It is very exercising, apart from what people think of us, “If any one think himself to be religious, not bridling his tongue, but deceiving his heart, this man’s religion is vain.”
W.J.H. That is an important matter. Bridling the tongue is a feature of true religion.
G.McK. We know there are false religions but this verse reminds us of what is pure.
W.J.H. That is what is before us. “Pure religion” consists before God and the Father of genuine care where there is distress and sorrow and need. “Unspotted from the world” would make us careful that worldly objects and worldly ways do not mark us in what we do. I heard to one’s sorrow recently of a cheque being found in the box on Lord’s day morning at a special collection. Why? It would seem the world’s spots marked the
{20}
giver. If I am giving or caring for the fatherless and the widow in order to be seen, my garments are not unspotted from the world.
G.McK. The Lord stressed in the sermon on the mount that giving should be in secret.
W.J.H. Those who give to be seen have their reward, there is nothing carried over for the future.
The last passage is one that all have delighted in many times, speaking of the product of the work of God by the Holy Spirit in the saints -- pure gold like pure glass.
G.McK. What is the thought of the glass?
W.J.H. I suppose gold signifies what is supremely precious whereas the glass signifies what is transparent. There is no such gold physically; no one has ever seen gold like pure glass, but it is the kind of gold that God will have; that which is expressive of His glory and in perfect transparency, all impurities being eliminated.
F.W.W. His divine nature is that.
W.J.H. “God is light and in Him is no darkness at all” (@1 John 1: 5).
R.A. We arrive at that in relation to the fellowship as walking in the light as He is in the light.
W.J.H. Yes. And the provision is made in that passage for the elimination of what
{21}
is impure -- “The blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses us from all sin” (@1 John 1: 7), so that as we submit to the cleansing there is something pure.
F.W.W. The purifying action does not produce what is pure but brings to light what is pure.
W.J.H. Yes and eliminates what is impure. The refiner’s fire is to take the dross out and leave only the gold, and the fuller’s soap is to wash out the impurities and leave a white garment. It is very instructive to see in this closing book the remarkable place white garments have throughout the book.
C.G. What is in mind in relation to the city?
W.J.H. The city is pure gold -- that is, the administration is pure and for God’s glory. That is a great matter to desire in every city. The city is pure gold like transparent glass; the pavement on which the saints walk is pure like the pavement under the feet of God. Let us be exercised to have purity under our feet.
A.B.J. Is @1 John 3: 2 a suggestion of what you are bringing before us, “Now are we children of God, and what we shall be has not yet been manifested; we know that if it is manifested we shall be like Him ... and everyone that has this hope in him
{22}
purifieth himself, even as He is pure.”
W.J.H. Exactly. Every one that has the hope of seeing Christ and being like Him purifies himself. It is only sentiment to say we are expecting the Lord to come and not be concerned as to purity.
J.W. Bearing on this is an expression in @Ezekiel 1: 22 as to the colour of the terrible crystal. Does the thought of holy fear come into all this?
W.J.H. That is what it is to fallen man -- the crystal is *terrible* crystal. While we have the flesh in us the crystal is terrible crystal, but we are to be in accord with it as clear glass.
L.G.L. Did Jacob touch it in principle in connection with the house of God? “How dreadful is this place! This is none other but the house of God” (@Genesis 28: 17), but when he comes back about twenty years after, he comes back along the line of putting away idols.
W.J.H. “Cleanse yourselves and change your garments; and we will arise and go up to Bethel” (@Genesis 35: 2).
L.G.L. He seems to do that without being instructed, he was suited to the occasion.
W.J.H. Quite so. He is still carrying the thought of the house of God being dreadful, so he says “Cleanse yourselves ... “
J.McA. Would you say a little more as
{23}
to what is under our feet being pure?
W.J.H. What kind of pavement are we walking on? Not our talk, but the sort of pavement our feet are upon; is it like God’s? It says of Him, “Under His feet as it were work of transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness” (@Exodus 24: 10 ). That kind of pavement is in the holy city.
J.McA. The walk would be in transparency.
W.J.H. There is no temple in the holy city for God and the Lamb are the temple. That means (if I understand it aright) that every part of the holy city is equally suitable for the presence of God. There is no shrine anywhere. God can come into the street. He can go to the river. He can go to the wall, and be at the gates -- no one part more select or holy than another. I wonder if we are prepared to entertain the thought of this now?
J.S.B. You are making these features that will be seen in that wonderful day to be very practical now with us.
W.J.H. What would be the meaning of testifying these things in the assemblies if they have no present bearing? (@Revelation 22: 16.) If we are in keeping with the holy city in our relations with God, with our brethren, in our natural relationships and in our
{24}
occupations there would not be one point to which God cannot come. The world does not know anything of such a thought. A city may have its cathedral, and not far off a lottery office and racecourse, but that is not the divine idea. The divine idea is that there is no temple therein, for God is the temple and the Lamb.
J.W. Does that bring out the peculiar place of those who form the holy city? There will be a temple on earth, will there not?
W.J.H. Quite so. Israel will be the temple, and will be more holy than the nations.
C.D. Is this suggested in what God said to Abraham, “Walk before my face and be perfect” (@Genesis 17: 1)?
W.J.H. God was watching everything that Abraham did.
G.McK. I was thinking of Paul writing to Philemon, “Prepare me also a lodging.” Philemon was capable of entertaining such an honoured servant.
W.J.H. What he would do would be to go through every part of his house and ask himself whether all would be acceptable to Paul; that nothing inconsistent with Paul and his ministry might be in that house.
C.D. One sister at Philippi said, “If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there” (@Acts 16: 15).
{25}
W.J.H. If Paul felt things were in keeping with him and those with him, then he would go there.
L.G.L. Nothing is said about the people in the city. We get the thought of population in relation to the cities of the world but it does not draw attention to that line of things here.
W.J.H. No. Because the persons are the city.
L.G.L. And no person stands out pre-eminently as an individual above any other, they all merge; Christ is really what the city expresses and the saints do that as a whole, not as individuals.
W.J.H. The whole thing is seen in completeness there and you and I need to remember that we are fellow-citizens, and how that would affect our deportment.
F.W.W. Is that why the Lamb is so prominent in connection with it -- there is the feature of suffering?
W.J.H. That is why the description is introduced by -- “Come here, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife.” She is in accord with Him as the holy Sufferer.
{26}
BREASTPLATES
@Exodus 28: 15 -- 30; @1 Thessalonians 5: 4 -- 8; @Ephesians 6: 10 -- 14; @Revelation 9: 13 -- 17
No doubt most will see that the subject I desire to speak of is connected with the thought of the breastplate, as found in scripture. Two matters of the greatest importance relate to the influences that bear on our affections, on the one hand, and what controls our minds on the other. The great issues that are being worked out relate to what is controlling our affections and our minds specially in the last days, as the Apostle says, in the last days men would have their hearts under many evil influences, being lovers of money -- that is one influence that controls the heart; and lovers of pleasure -- another; and lovers of self -- another very great one; and having no love for what is good; and “lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God” (@2 Timothy 3: 4). God not in their hearts. On the other hand, dear brethren, one of the great issues of the Book of Revelation is as to who is to have man’s mind? The importance given to the forehead in that book is significant. God would seal the foreheads of His own -- the Name of God and the Lamb is to be there. The false prophet would put the mark
{27}
of the beast -- his name -- on the foreheads of those he deceives. I do not pursue the last subject, but I wish to take up the influences that God would have bearing on our affections which I believe is the one thought set out in the breastplate which guards and influences the affections. As it says in the first passage read, Aaron would bear this wonderful breastplate on his heart; his heart would be influenced by what was set out in that breastplate, and I would speak of this first, for one loves to think of what is engaging the Lord’s heart at the present time. He uses wonderful words in the scripture, “And for their sakes I sanctify Myself” (@John 17: 19), the Lord setting Himself apart for our sakes that we might be sanctified by the truth. Think of the Lord setting Himself apart as though He had nothing else to do (though He has very much more on hand, for He is so great He can do everything). He speaks in the seventeenth John just as if that was all that was engaging Him. “For their sakes I sanctify Myself,” He says, and the Apostle presents a similar thought, “He *ever liveth* to make intercession for them” (@Hebrews 7: 25), as though the Lord was ever living with this one object to take care of His own. This I believe underlies the thought of the breastplate. It is made of gold, and of blue and of purple and of scarlet and fine twined linen; these
{28}
things represent the basis of which this breastplate is formed, and indicate to us what the Lord has in view in this service. First the *gold*, the structure of the breastplate indicates that divine glory is first there; and the *blue*, the will of God -- for that is what the blue signifies, I believe, “Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven” (@Matthew 6: 10). Heaven is where the will of God prevails, and it is the will of God that the Lord has in view; and the *purple* signifies that He takes us up in the power that is His as King; the *scarlet* is true greatness; and the *linen* righteousness. On this combination of materials there are set these twelve stones in rows of three, and on each the name of one of the tribes of Israel. The Lord in that way is presented to us as the great Priest carrying all the tribes by name on His heart. It is called the breastplate of judgment; that does not mean punishment but rather that the Lord is engaged in seeing that what is according to God is maintained in each tribe, that God’s thoughts for each tribe are being executed and maintained. There is but little that we can say about each tribe but they are all there, each with its own distinctiveness, each with a distinct name. Each stone is descriptive of the distinctive character of the tribe, and the Lord is engaged, His heart is engaged, in the support of this, and if need be His shoulders are engaged,
{29}
for the Spirit of God is careful to say that this breastplate is bound to the shoulder as well as round the girdle, for the Lord’s strength, if necessary, becomes active in this matter as well as His heart.
I do not propose to speak of what the twelve tribes of Israel represent, even if I could, but to us the tribal position means the local position. Israel may be looked at as one nation, a holy nation, but the tribes represent every section, every locality making up Israel. I do not think we realise sufficiently how the Lord loves local assemblies. He loves the Church in its Ephesian character -- “Christ also loved the church and gave Himself for it” (@Ephesians 5: 25). That is the whole assembly, but then He loves local assemblies and would have each maintained in its own distinctive character according to the work of God. This is seen in the Lord’s movements in the seven assemblies, how He speaks to each, how He encourages each, how He notes the deficiency or dangers threatening each, how He warns most, showing the perfect interest the Lord had in each of the seven assemblies which represent all. The Lord’s heart engaged with every one of these stones that each tribe should be supported according to the divine thought as to each. I have no doubt the source of what is represented in these stones is the Urim and Thummim, light
{30}
and perfection as seen in Christ. Every light, every thought that was ever in mind to be expressed in the assemblies, has its origin in Christ, and perfection, the blessed answer to the light, is also expressed in Him. These great thoughts are set out in Moses and Aaron. Moses in a sense brings the light and Aaron brings the response to the light, perfection. There is, of course, what is proper to, and common to all the assemblies, as the Apostle says, “We have no such custom, neither the churches of God” (@1 Corinthians 11: 16). There is what is proper to all, but then there is what is distinctive with each one and that is what the Lord is engaged with, for each one expresses something of Himself, each one expresses some feature that comes from the light and is an answer to the perfection that is in Himself.
As privileged to see some of the beloved saints in various cities, one is filled with admiration at the way the Lord maintains His own work in every city. It is significant that the priest with the Urim and Thummim is mentioned again in the days of Nehemiah in days of recovery though in great weakness, for so weak was the position outwardly that they said, “If a fox go up he shall even break down their stone wall” (@Nehemiah 4: 3). That is true externally as we think of the dear brethren recovered to the truth in the
{31}
various cities, the position outwardly is as weak as water, and it would seem as if any fox could break it down, but many a fox has tried, yet the wall stands. The priest with the Urim and Thummim has arisen with the breastplate on His heart and He is engaged maintaining His people in tribal settings. It is very affecting to see what is preserved year after year in many localities, but this is owing to the breastplate on the heart of the great Priest. He sees that the work of God is not destroyed, but what is in some sense descriptive of some feature of Christ is maintained. I do not deny the weakness, but there is in this day what corresponds with Nehemiah’s day, and the Lord is engaged protecting the work of God in every tribe.
Now to refer for a moment to the stones themselves; if we understood them more we would know that each stone describes what God would have in each particular tribe, for on each stone is the name of a tribe. Name means the renown or the distinctive feature of the tribe. I have no doubt the same thought is in the twenty-first Revelation where the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb are stated to be in the foundation, and the precious stones are there. Each precious stone probably has some relation to the name or distinctive feature marking each Apostle.
{32}
God would maintain in localities what is represented in these stones. I am sure there is distinctiveness that He would have in this city, as a feature of the work of God. A frequent feature found in the stones is the blending of colours. One distinct colour stands out with some; red with the ruby, blue with the sapphire, green with the emerald, purple with the amethyst, but most of the others are blended colours, and I believe God greatly delights in stones that blend together various colours in beauty. God has done this in creation, it is delightful to see it whether you look at it in flowers or birds or insects or precious stones. What effects God gets when He blends colours!
Where will you see such perfect blending of moral beauties as in our Lord Jesus? At times you see the green, at times the purple, but how often a perfect blend giving a wonderful effect. God hates wrong mixtures but He loves right ones. The holy anointing oil was compounded together with various ingredients after the art of the apothecary, a wonderful art that blended together the various substances to produce a unique odour. Think of the Lord at Calvary -- we see the blue, perfect submission to the will of God; we see the purple, the true King; we see the ruby, true greatness; we see the emerald, freshness and living conditions, the green tree indeed;
{33}
we see the jasper, perfect transparency; the diamond glistening with the light of heaven; but in addition, we see the most beautiful combination of moral excellence. God would have these features in local companies. The Lord is speaking to us in many places as to the ability to blend, to combine the work of God with various features all in harmony. I have no doubt He would have every local company learn this great lesson, but He would have it to be distinctive in some places. There are some places where the brethren are blended together in holy and beautiful features. Then he would have the sapphire so that it may be said of this tribe that it always maintains the will of God: come what may, the will of God is to prevail. In another tribe you see the amethyst: true ability to rule according to God exists. In another tribe the ruby -- the red of true greatness, not the greatness of man after the flesh, but true greatness is found. What a beautiful stone! Another tribe is marked by the jasper -- transparency, nothing dark and hidden secreted there. I can only suggest these things; they are on the Lord’s heart to maintain in *every* locality, even in what corresponds with Nehemiah’s day of public ruin -- the distinctive feature of the work of God in every assembly and in every city. He says to one of the seven assemblies, “As many
{34}
as I love” (@Revelation 3: 19). His heart is influenced by God’s thoughts for the assemblies, and His shoulders bear the burdens as well as His heart that these distinctive features might come out even in the last days. It is noticeable that the prophet Zechariah wakes up out of sleep and he sees the seven branched golden candlestick. God thus securing at the end of Israel’s history, prior to the Lord coming to them, what He began with. So the Lord is moving in our day to recover local assemblies in various places as at the beginning, and to form in each some distinctive feature of the work of God. I admit that in some ways the assemblies are to be alike, yet God would have a distinctive feature stand out in every assembly.
The breastplate of judgment is entirely Christ’s, Aaron being a figure of Him; there is no suggestion that Aaron’s sons had it, I am sure we love to recognise any service that is confined to Him. The Apostle Paul refers to a Thessalonian breastplate, and to an Ephesian breastplate for the saints. Our affections are to be protected and influenced by these breastplates. The Thessalonian one is faith and love. Instead of being controlled by the darkness and drunkenness of the day around them, they were the children of light and were to have this breastplate of faith
{35}
and love. Their affections are protected and influenced by these two features, faith and love. The Thessalonians were a young, happy company of saints, marked by great affection; they were the assembly of the Thessalonians in God the Father. The enemy would break through, but their protection was faith and love. If there is anything fresh and living today, it needs this breastplate, the young specially need it. Faith means that our hearts are influenced by what is unseen. The great effort of the enemy today, as ever, is to bring us under the control of what is visible. But faith brings the heart under the control of what is invisible. As with Moses he “endured as seeing Him Who is invisible” (@Hebrews 11: 27). What a breastplate he had! His eye was on the invisible God. The Lord, too, says, “Abraham rejoiced to see my day; and he saw it, and was glad” (@John 8: 56). His eye was looking out for the heavenly city, “For he looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God” (@Hebrews 11: 10). The king of Sodom would get at his heart, he would say “Give me the persons, you can have the goods,” but the breastplate of faith and love guards Abraham. “He that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of there that diligently seek Him” (@Hebrews 11: 6). I have no doubt the beloved brethren
{36}
abroad are learning in a special way to see Him Who is invisible, and have their affections set on Christ “Whom having not seen we love,” and to regard the heavenly city, “Ye are come unto mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem” (@Hebrews 12: 22). All this is in faith, and faith is one of the great elements that guard our hearts from the darkness of the night around. Two great features of the moment are darkness and intemperance, not only in a material sense, but morally, but our safeguard is in faith and love. It is remarkable how these two are often brought together, faith is translated into actions, for faith works through love. As the Apostle says, “Let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth” (@1 John 3: 18). Faith without actions is questionable. Abraham is the father of the faithful -- he is also marked by love -- he loved God, and he loved Isaac. “Your faith increases exceedingly and the love of each one of you all” (@2 Thessalonians 1: 3).
I refer to the Ephesian breastplate -- called the breastplate of righteousness -- part of the armour of God. The Apostle is speaking of the great conflict in which dreadful powers are engaged -- far greater than flesh and blood -- “principalities and powers.” We have no conception of the mighty power of the princes of darkness -- princes, not merely
{37}
angels, but princes. “Spiritual wickedness in the heavenlies:” unseen lawless activities that operate on men’s spirits. Then he calls them the universal lords of this darkness, far greater than the great dictators of the world, “universal lords of this darkness.” The Apostle wrestled against them. One admitted his power, saying, “Jesus I know and Paul I am acquainted with” (@Acts 19: 15). All the infernal powers know Jesus and they will know His power further, they will have to confess that He is Lord, but they have been already made to feel His power. Paul had made them know him, for he had on this armour in the conflict, including the breastplate of righteousness. This is a very serious matter for us all, for what exposures there have been of some who assumed to enter the conflict, assumed to take part in this mighty wrestling. It humbles us, and indeed one would speak with fear, but if in the background of our lives there is unrighteousness, these powers will overcome us, we shall never stand against them; the safeguard for the heart is the breastplate of righteousness. Better not to enter into the conflict than to have in our relationships of life, or in our occupations, what is unrighteous. I speak urgently and feelingly, but I beg everyone to see that there is no hope to escape the fiery darts of the wicked one unless our
{38}
affections are under the influence of righteousness. Our blessed Lord could face all the darts the devil possessed. “Thou hast loved righteousness and hast hated lawlessness” (@Hebrews 1: 9). If we are to be supported in the battle against these evil influences, we must have the breastplate of righteousness. Let us therefore judge and abandon every unrighteous matter in our homes, in our relationships of life, in our occupations.
I pray the Lord will help us all, especially those who are active in conflict, to see that righteousness is guarding our affections, righteousness toward God and toward Christ, toward one another and toward the world.
I would say a word about this last breastplate, a dreadful one which is rapidly appearing; 200 million horsemen from the Eastern world bring into christendom the darkening teaching of apostasy. “Out of their mouths issued fire and smoke and brimstone” (@Revelation 9: 17). It is what is being taught by these dreadful powers in such things as spiritism and theosophy and the like that destroys men morally. Fire consumes, smoke blinds and brimstone poisons. These horsemen have breastplates of fire and jacinth and brimstone. What breastplates! What a contrast to the beautiful breastplate of Aaron! They are past feeling. Ephesians speaks of this. Fire represents that which
{39}
would consume; jacinth, the hard state of their affections; and the brimstone, what poisons. With such breastplates their feelings cannot be touched, they do not care what happens to anyone. Lack of true human feeling is one of the features of the modern world. It will appear in its fulness soon. “The beast which I saw was like unto a leopard and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion” (@Revelation 13: 2). There is complete disregard for human feelings in the leopard, the bear and the lion. That is what is coming and what is almost here, breastplates appearing of fire and jacinth and brimstone.
I only point it out in contrast. Think of all the tender feelings of the heart of Christ! Think of His holy breastplate of judgment as He takes up the interests of every tribe and sees they are effectively carried out and secured. Think of the breastplate of the Thessalonians, faith and love. Think of the Ephesian breastplate of righteousness. If we turn away from these holy influences, our hearts may be affected by the awful breastplates soon to be manifest in this world. God grant we may cultivate tender feelings, that we may be far, far away from such a breastplate as is seen with these horsemen. May the Lord save His people from such a breastplate by bringing us to, appreciate the breastplate
{40}
of Christ, by helping us to have on day and night the breastplate of faith and love and also the breastplate of righteousness.
{41}
OUR MINDS
@Revelation 7: 1 -- 8; @Revelation 13: 11 -- 18; @Revelation 14: 1 -- 5
W.J.H. I thought we might consider these passages as bearing on how God would secure our minds for Himself. We were speaking last night of the importance of the heart -- and that is first, for it says, “Keep thy heart more than anything that is guarded; for out of it are the issues of life” (@Proverbs 4: 23). But next to the affections, the mind is of the greatest importance, and one has been impressed that the forehead is one of the great issues in the book of Revelation; the question being whether the beast is to have it or whether God is to have it. We might learn from these scriptures some of the great results that flow from surrendering our minds to divine ownership, and be warned, afresh, of the dreadful results of surrendering our minds to the world’s power and what lies behind it.
G.McK. All these scriptures you have read have reference to the forehead. Is that what you have in mind?
W.J.H. Yes. I think the forehead is selected both by God and by the Antichrist because of the importance of the mind.
E.M. The word seems to have a large place in ministry in these closing days. It is
{42}
in keeping with what you have before you.
W.J.H. Christ as the Word discloses to us the mind of God. That is also found in this book; His name is called The Word of God (@Revelation 19: 13). I believe, with the pressure that is increasing in the world, there is danger lest we let our minds get out of control.
G.McK. You mean in thinking of the terrible things that are happening?
W.J.H. It is so easy to think of nothing else.
W.B.P. We are to control our minds and not to let our minds control us.
W.J.H. The Apostle Peter says, “Having girded up the loins of your mind” (@1 Peter 1: 13). It is on us to put a girdle round our minds which means we accept restriction on our minds.
R.A. Is that what is suggested in @Romans 7, “I myself with the mind serve God’s law”?
W.J.H. Indicating that the believer there has control of his mind, he knows what he does with it. We must accept a girdle for our minds, meaning that we keep them inside a restricted area.
W.B.P. Are our minds an avenue to the heart?
W.J.H. Well, they are very closely linked together. I have no doubt the affections probably play the greatest part in our spiritual
{43}
history, but next is the mind.
G.H. Aaron had a thin plate of gold on his forehead, suggesting that his mind was controlled by holiness to Jehovah.
G.McK. Did you have in mind to say anything about the first verse of the seventh chapter? The wind not blowing before the 12,000 from each tribe were sealed.
W.J.H. Do you not think something like that has happened in recent years. God has kept in check the dreadful influences that would destroy all life according to God, giving us the opportunity to have our foreheads accept the seal of the living God. The result in many is seen that even in the dreadful conditions now existent in certain countries there are those whose minds are preserved in relation to what is of God.
J.N.G. Does the seal denote ownership?
W.J.H. The seal means that the mind of the believer is the property of God, it represents ownership and finality. Both thoughts are in a seal -- on the one side it is the proof of ownership, and on the other side the matter is fixed. When a document is sealed, it denotes the end of a matter.
Ques. Would this be a future company?
W.J.H. Yes. All this is future. But the Lord says to testify these things in the assembly. It will not help us to look at it only as future, every part of this book has
{44}
a present bearing on us.
W.B.P. That makes it very important as to what we allow into our minds.
W.J.H. I believe we must face this if we are to be preserved -- Have we submitted our foreheads for the seal of the living God as owning our minds, or have we reserves?
W.H.G. The question of our bodies is very greatly simplified if the mind is properly secured, the twelfth chapter of Romans corning in intelligently after the seventh.
W.J.H. Quite so. The surrendering of the body a living sacrifice is said to be our intelligent service, the mind is in the matter, it is not mechanical.
G.A. Would Daniel and his companions help us as to the practical effect of the sealing? They lived in very difficult days.
W.J.H. Very much so. Dreadful things happened in Babylon, persecution even to a furnace seven times heated. Daniel however understood by books. Daniel’s mind at that time was within a girdle. While he did his duty to the king, his mind was set on what is of God. It is affecting that many brethren so tried today can still think for God and His service though the winds are blowing so adversely; but such had accepted the seal of the living God on the foreheads before the winds blew. Before the winds blow here, are we prepared to accept the seal of the
{45}
living God on our foreheads?
G.McK. Why does it say the “living” God?
W.J.H. What is in view is that God should be served in a living way, not by creeds or vain repetition.
G.D. You were saying that Daniel knew by books? That should be a word to us as to what we read.
W.J.H. It would, and gives the scriptures special importance. The Holy Spirit stresses the value of the scripture in the last days. See @2 Timothy 3: 16, 17.
G.D. One feels there is a great danger of being carried away by a certain class of book.
W.J.H. Hence the importance of the girdle for the mind, that is, to accept restriction as to what we read and think upon.
A.LeS. “Have your mind on the things above” (@Colossians 3: 2).
W.J.H. It is for us to do that; “not on things on the earth” is the girdle.
W.H.G. How does the suggestion of bondmen come in in connection with the sealing as applying to us?
W.J.H. No one but bondmen would submit to this, it is the bondmen of our God that are sealed, their mind is divine property because they are. They are bondmen, not servants merely, but slaves, and are thus
{46}
entirely at the disposal of the Master.
W.H.G. Does the sealing come in as marking us in an outward way before men as those whose minds have been secured for God?
W.J.H. As in the forehead it is discernible, what is in the heart is not.
G.A. You referred to the thought of divine ownership. One wonders whether that is much developed in actuality, whether we are not fundamentally lacking in recognising we really do belong to God, spirit, soul, and body; we could not truly be apart from that. The Apostle says “Whose I am and whom I serve” (@Acts 27: 23).
W.J.H. Quite so. “Whose I am” includes his mind. I feel we should see in this particular passage that *before* the winds blow is the time for the forehead to be sealed -- too late when the winds blow to receive it.
G.H. Is there any significance in the repetition in the words “out of the tribe of Juda,” etc.?
W.J.H. The tribal position represents what is local in our day. The divine thought is that in every locality there should be those whose minds are the property of God; that is the secret of true administration. Twelve thousand -- true administration in Melbourne depends on there being those whose minds are controlled as divine property.
{47}
J.N.G. Have you in mind that when the winds do blow there is that secured for God through which God can carry on His thoughts?
W.J.H. Quite so. He will not allow the destruction that comes to touch those who have the seal. I do not mean physically -- in His wisdom He may permit His people to be physically affected, also their homes, but they will come through for God, they will not be morally destroyed, even if some may die.
W.B.P. We see that in the first martyr Stephen.
W.J.H. His address shows where his mind was. He can go over the ways of God, he has the seal in his forehead and is morally unaffected by the raging winds of hatred and murder.
A.LeS. He was the victor there.
W.J.H. The winds did not destroy that tree, every leaf of it was as green as ever even in the furnace of man’s hatred.
C.P.P. The Lord Himself could speak of His ear being opened morning by morning. That would be the avenue to the mind. Is that not a good start for the day?
W.J.H. The thing that tests is *morning by morning*. We may be preserved for one or two mornings, but it is a matter of *morning by morning*: the ear opened to receive God’s word, the mind controlled by God day by day.
{48}
R.A. Is the essence of all we have referred to seen in @Philippians 2, “Let this mind be in you” and we are told He took a bondman’s form?
W.J.H. In perfection.
C.P.P. It is a solemn thing if the Lord should have to speak to any one of us as He did to Peter, “Thy mind is not on the things that are of God” (@Mark 8: 33).
W.J.H. Up to that moment Peter’s forehead was not sealed, but it appears in his epistle for he refers much to the mind. “Having girded up the loins of your mind” (@1 Peter 1: 13). “Pure mental milk of the word” (@1 Peter 2: 2). “Arm yourselves with the same mind” (@1 Peter 4: 1). “Putting in remembrance your pure mind” (@2 Peter 3: 1).
G.McK. In that way there is hope for every one of us?
W.J.H. There is, but it is urgent, for the winds may soon blow as we have never seen them blow.
W.H.G. Do the winds in that sense imply the evil spiritual influences that we find operating behind international movements today and that in the time of which we have been reading will be allowed of God in the way of judgment?
W.J.H. Quite so. The four angels represent God’s providential control of these evil
{49}
influences pending the sealing of His bondmen.
W.H.G. If such influences are allowed to affect our minds they are disastrous to what is of God.
W.J.H. When evil influences do blow in their fulness under the beast and the antichrist, they affect the forehead; the influence of the false prophet results in a mark being put on the forehead or on the hand; he wants the mind to serve the beast and his kingdom. Those of Israel who are not sealed as God’s bondmen will accept this mark.
W.P. The Apostle could say to the Corinthians, “We have the mind of Christ” (@1 Corinthians 2: 16).
W.J.H. A wonderful statement! They could think as Christ thinks, that is what it means.
G.H. A mark would be different from a seal.
W.J.H. No doubt it is, but it seems to me it is the devil’s imitation of what God has already done. It is as near as he can get to it. The seal of the living God is the divine mark but the false prophet has the idea and causes the mark to be placed on the forehead. I believe unless we accept what the seal means we are in danger of the spirit of the mark, our minds thus contributing to the glory of this world.
C.P.P. The training of the mind has a
{50}
much greater place in the world’s system than it used to have.
W.J.H. And is increasing.
G.A. The mind of man is the great instrument Satan is using.
W.J.H. If the forehead is not suitable for the mark, the hand is marked, but the mind is the most important, and the object is that it should be controlled by the name of the beast.
G.McK. Would it be out of place to ask you what is suggested by the beast?
W.J.H. He is the great climax to the working of pride in man, the seed of which was sown by the serpent, “Ye will be as God” (@Genesis 3: 5). The goal is reached in the thirteenth chapter, the beast and his system is worshipped and the worshippers give their minds or their hands over to it.
G.McK. The Apostle Paul in Ephesians speaks of the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience. Is this the climax of that spirit?
W.J.H. Quite so. The image of the beast is not a return to worshipping wood and stone but involves the worship of a man and the system of which that man is head.
W.B.P. Do we not have a type of it in Nebuchadnezzar at the commencement of Gentile power?
W.J.H. Yes. Nebuchadnezzar having been
{51}
told by God the history of government in the hand of the Gentile sets up an image to be worshipped, but there were three men who had the seal of the living God in their foreheads. God had anticipated Nebuchadnezzar and had secured their minds for Himself, so that they did not worship his image.
W.B.P. Is what we are considering the end of power in the hands of the Gentiles?
W.J.H. Yes. The issue will be the worship of man. Nebuchadnezzar did not erect an image of gold, silver, brass, iron and iron and clay. He refused to accept the deterioration of power in Gentile hands. He made his image all of gold and commanded all to worship. The beast, too, claims divine honours.
G.A. Do you think Nebuchadnezzar learnt the lesson of his dream in the fourth chapter after seven times had passed over him and his glory returned?
W.J.H. Yes. God then had His right place, “Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the King of heaven” (@Daniel 4: 37).
J.N.G. Would you say a word in that connection as to the company having “the name of His Father written upon their foreheads”?
W.J.H. That is where the seventh chapter leads spiritually; having accepted the seal
{52}
of the living God in the forehead they refuse the mark of the beast in their forehead. They are then found on Mount Zion with the Lamb and they have His name and His Father’s name on their foreheads. Though not actually the same persons this is the moral sequence. If our minds are surrendered to God it will result in the name of the Lamb instead of the name of the beast being there, and also His Father’s name, the Source from whence has come all that came out in the Lamb.
G.McK. Why does he say “The Lamb” not “The Lord” or “Christ”?
W.J.H. Because the Lamb stands over against the beast, there are these two names, the beast who is like a leopard, and its feet like a bear and its mouth as a lion’s mouth and there is the “Lamb” -- Jesus! How impossible to have part in the name of both!
G.McK. I was wondering why the Lord was presented as the Lamb?
W.J.H. The Lord as presented thus is endeared to our hearts for it is really the little lamb in Revelation, a diminutive thought -- suggesting the suffering One, the lowly One, the dependent One. How different from one who combines the features of a lion, a bear and a leopard. Those whose minds are sealed get the name of the Lamb on their foreheads, the renown of that lowly Sufferer written on their foreheads and the
{53}
renown of His Father.
G.H. Will not the regime of the beast cause great suffering at that time?
W.J.H. Can you conceive anything more dreadful than the description given? “And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion; and the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority” (@Revelation 13: 2).
Ques. Do you think God ever intended man to reach the number “six”?
W.J.H. That is man’s number, seven is the divine number.
Ques. Would not five be more in line with God’s thoughts, weakness, dependence?
W.J.H. The general thought of “six” is that it is man’s total.
W.H.G. The name of the Lamb written on their foreheads would indicate that features of the Lamb have been maintained in suffering. They have gone through in victory in face of all that the beast represents.
W.J.H. Surely. These are not in heaven literally, they are still on earth, but in their affections and minds they are on Mount Zion with the Lamb and following Him wherever He goes.
At the close of the thirteenth chapter it says, “Here is wisdom. He that has understanding let him count the number of the beast” (@Revelation 13: 18).
{54}
I have no doubt those one hundred and forty-four thousand had wisdom and they counted -- it is a remarkable word -- they used their minds arithmetically putting down every claim the beast made, the false prophet asserting them with such deceptive signs, and came to the conclusion that he was only a man, not God.
Rem. Paul counted on that line as to suffering and glory.
W.J.H. Quite so. He counted correctly. (See @Philippians 3: 7, 8, 9.)
R.A. The twelfth John gives the holy counting of a soul devoted to Christ. Mary counted and reached the conclusion that death could not hold Him.
W.J.H. Quite so. And there, too, we have another counting. Judas counts what the ointment was worth and was all wrong. He really was in accord with the son of perdition, indeed he too is named as such.
W.H.G. Daniel’s three friends have been referred to; they counted too; they said, “Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us ... be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods nor worship the golden image” (@Daniel 3: 17, 18).
W.J.H. They had counted rightly. Nebuchadnezzar had his music that affected all that heard except those three. In @Revelation 14 you have persons who have refused the mark
{55}
of the beast and they have the name of the Lamb and His Father on their foreheads, and they are learning the music of heaven and worshipping God at the time when idolatrous worship is being given to the beast.
T.R.Y. Does the mark of the beast involve what is final?
W.J.H. It does. The smoke of their torment goes up for ever and ever involving final judgment.
W.H.G. Would you say a little as to the “Father’s name”?
W.J.H. As far as I know it is the only scripture that speaks of the Father of the Lamb. Scripture speaks of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ and also our Father but these have the name of the Lamb and His Father, the One who is the Source of everything that came out in the Lamb. Think of the name of such an One! How different from the dragon. The Lamb is over against the beast, and His Father is over against the dragon, the source of all that came out in the beast. Things in the world now are being prepared for the manifestation of the beast and the false prophet with the dragon as the source. What is suggested in Nebuchadnezzar’s music will bring all to the worship of the beast. In contrast, those who have the name of the Lamb and His Father on their foreheads learn the song of heaven and under
{56}
its holy influence worship God.
J.N.G. Has the Supper a bearing on this? Does the Lord every first day of the week work through our affections to help us to abstract our minds?
W.J.H. The mind has a remarkable place in the Supper for *remembrance* is a matter of the mind. Joseph said, “Think on me when it shall be well with thee” (@Genesis 40: 14), and we come together really to think on the Lord for that is the bearing of remembrance that He has a place in our minds. “Think on me.” That would show that Joseph wanted the mind of the butler to be engaged with himself.
R.A. Malachi closes like that -- referring to those who thought upon His name.
W.J.H. Very good. God remembered them, a book of remembrance was written before Him for those that thought on His name.
G.D. Does all this terrible result to which the world is moving flow from choosing Barabbas instead of Jesus?
W.J.H. Barabbas means “son of a father,” and the Lord is the Son of the Father, and the world has chosen the son of the devil, while believers accept the Son of the Father. The worship of the beast and receiving his mark and the number of his name terminate in the lake of fire. The receiving of the
{57}
name of the Lamb and His Father on the forehead secures that we learn the music of heaven and have part in the worship of God.
G.McK. You said that the Lamb involves the thought of the One that suffered, did you not
W.J.H. Clearly that is how the Lamb is introduced in the fifth chapter -- *as slain*, showing His suffering is in mind but then there is His attractiveness and accessibility. What a contrast, is presented in the mouth of a lion or the feet of a bear or being like a leopard!
R.A. In @Revelation 21 the bride is spoken of as the Lamb’s wife.
W.J.H. Quite so. She is in keeping with His features as the Lamb.
W.B.P. The thirteenth chapter verse 11 speaks of a beast having two horns like a lamb and speaking as a dragon. What is the meaning of the two horns?
W.J.H.. The first beast takes God’s place, but the false prophet takes Christ’s place and outwardly appears like a lamb, but when you listen to what he says you can trace the dragon in speech. Modern apostasy often has these two features -- external evidence of meekness, patience, etc., but the teaching is of the devil.
G.H. This company in chapter 14 is the nearest to heaven in that day, is it not? And
{58}
thus affords lessons to us now.
W.J.H. I thought so. They are so near to heaven that they can learn heaven’s song. That is where the saints are to be now. We are not in heaven yet but the Lord would have us to be so near to heaven as to hear and to learn heaven’s song, but how can you learn it if your mind is not under control?
W.B.P. We sing sometimes, “On earth the song begins.”
W.J.H. Well, it is a great thing to be ready to learn. No one can learn, it says, except the one hundred and forty-four thousand who were bought from the earth but their foreheads having the name of the Lamb and His Father on them they are available to learn. Again the thought of ownership comes in, they are bought from the earth.
G.McK. Paul says, “Ye are not your own” (@1 Corinthians 6: 19).
W.J.H. The more the things above engage our minds, the more we will be free from the unholy influences that emanate from the pit, that darken even the sun.
J.N.G. It says of these that they “follow the Lamb wheresoever it goes.” There is much to occupy our minds in regard to Christ’s movements in the assembly today.
W.J.H. As was remarked His name is called the Word of God. He expresses the
{59}
mind of God -- sufficient surely to engage our minds.
G.A. The culminating thought is seen in that, they are like the blessed Person they have followed, and are formed by Him.
W.J.A. Quite so. Like the Lamb there is no guile in their mouth.
Two other references are found in this book to the forehead. On the forehead of the false woman is a name “Mystery, Babylon the great, mother of harlots and of the abominations of the earth.” That manifests what has engaged her mind. In the twenty-second Revelation it is said of those who form the Holy City, “His name is in their foreheads.” Religiously everything is gravitating either towards Babylon with its dreadful name or towards the Holy City where all see His face and have His name in their foreheads.
{60}
UPWARD
@1 Kings 6: 2 -- 8; @John 20: 1: 18
W.J.H. The thought one would desire we might be engaged with relates to the fact recorded by the Spirit of God that part of the house of God contained three storeys or floors to which access was had by a winding staircase from floor to floor, each floor being larger than the one preceding. I think the spiritual meaning of this might be traced in the twentieth of John, and being connected with the first day of the week is a suggestion of what the Lord would have us know every first day of the week. He would have us move gradually from one level to another until it may be, we touch a little of what is in the third storey. But all depends on our being able to rightly occupy the lower floors. It is instructive to see that the thought of three storeys or three levels finds expression in most structures erected by or for God. It is evidently a prime thought with Him, hence it is not surprising to find it appears in the assembly’s history, it being specifically mentioned that Paul in Troas ministered in the third storey -- Paul’s ministry takes us to that level.
A.H.S. Had you in mind to trace the
{61}
ascent first to indicate where we start?
W.J.H. It is remarkable that the Spirit of God should record that the staircase was winding, meaning, I believe, that we go a step at a time without seeing very far ahead. Jacob saw a ladder from earth to heaven, but when the house is built there is a winding staircase, the view being not very far ahead, but nevertheless the ascent continues gradually.
Rem. The thought suggested in the winding staircase is a progressive thought.
W.J.H. Yes, winding signifying that the ascent is gradual. We have known something of what it is to see a certain distance by what is introduced at the beginning of the meeting but gradually where the Lord would bring us is discerned.
J.W. Steps are evenly spaced, there are no gaps.
W.J.H. Yes, it means a steady ascent -- not a sudden one like a ladder. Before we proceed with the detail a little, the brethren will see the importance of this thought as found first in the *heavens*, for scripture speaks of the third heaven, “caught up to the third heaven” (@2 Corinthians 12: 2), showing there are three that can be known. Then God’s instructions to Noah were to build the *ark* in three storeys, the *tabernacle* was built in three sections, each one holier than the other; the court and the holy place, and the most holy;
{62}
the *temple* of Solomon has chambers erected in three storeys. *Ezekiel’s temple* will include three storeys; and *Paul* as we have said ministered in the third storey; showing he had passed through the other two necessarily. God in building man (for man is a kind of building, too) built him in three storeys, spirit, soul and body, the spirit being the highest, the soul coming next, and the body being the lowest level.
A.H.S. Would the thoughts of those three storeys and the three sections in the tabernacle suggest something of the work of God that is necessary to fit us to reach the highest or the holiest point? The work of Christ for us and the work of God in us -- the presence of the Holy Spirit in us?
W.J.H. That is what I thought. Our ability to pass from one to the other depends on the work of God in us, and things being right on the ground floor, for our main exercises relate to our responsible life. We come together at the Supper as in the wilderness.
A.H.S. Does the distance the Lord is able to take us at the Supper depend on how we are found on that ground floor?
W.J.H. I think that is of the greatest importance. Our ability to really touch what is on the second and third floors depends on how far we are on the ground floor.
{63}
I think it is worked out in Mary Magdalene on the first day of the week. She moves from floor to floor, being first on the ground level of the rejection and burial of the Lord Jesus Christ. She is right there, and moves to the level of the resurrection of Christ and is adjusted there, then she moves into the light of the ascension of Christ and can carry such a heavenly message rightly. One had in mind that we should look at Mary travelling from floor to floor until she reaches the highest level a saint can know.
A.B.J. I was wondering if the thought of kingdom exercises are essential as being on the lowest level? We are very weak on kingdom exercises.
W.J.H. I believe that is why it is called the Lord’s Supper. Many have regarded it as Christ’s Supper, and some God’s Supper. Some have sought to begin in the third storey disregarding the moral state of the saints present. It is the Lord’s Supper and all depends on our relation with the Lord.
G.McK. The Supper also has to do with our relations with one another.
W.J.H. “When ye come together” -- the Lord’s Supper is not partaken of alone, by an individual. “When ye come together in assembly I hear there exist divisions among you” (@1 Corinthians 11: 18) -- showing that their relations together were not right.
{64}
G.H. Do you put the epistle to the Romans as on the lowest floor as setting us right in wilderness history?
W.J.H. Romans is teaching for the ground floor in our individual exercises; Corinthians for the ground floor in our assembly exercises locally; Colossians has in view the second storey “If therefore ye have been raised with Christ” (@Colossians 3: 1), but Ephesians is for the third storey -- heavenly places, and the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ worshipped. But there is no ladder to these storeys, and all depends for us upon how we are on the ground floor.
V.D. Would you say a little more as to what was in your mind as to it not being Christ’s Supper but that we should view it as the Lord’s Supper?
W.J.H. The great thought of Christ is that He is Head -- the Head of the body is Christ in Colossians and Ephesians, but the setting of the Supper is not headship, but lordship, hence we are challenged as to how far we are really subject to Him.
Romans works out how an individual even with a dreadful past history can be recovered for God; Corinthians works out how a local company can be for God in a wilderness setting.
G.A. In relation to @1 Corinthians 11, I wondered whether the Apostle’s ministry there is not
{65}
really that of a spiritual physician, he speaks of that which he is going to prescribe? Perhaps we need ministry that would adjust us in relation to the ground floor.
W.J.H. That is good. He also speaks of himself as a wise master-builder, he would know what was suitable to the ground floor of God’s building, and hence takes up with them their moral state and their relations with one another, the deportment of the women, their hair and many other matters.
D.T. As being subject to the Lord in that way, is it necessary to have these narrow windows?
W.J.H. You mean there is a restricted outlook, the windows being fixed. But each floor is larger, indicating more room being available. I mentioned the scripture in Kings to apply it to the twentieth of John, that we might see this truth worked out in Mary as a pattern. What a history she had had! Introduced in scripture as a woman controlled by seven devils, but they are cast out by the Lord, and then she follows Him, ministering to Him of her substance. Thus she is now not only free of the control of evil powers, but her substance is held rightly. I believe that is a matter which enters much into how we come together. What are we doing with our substance? She evidently had substance and had learnt how to hold
{66}
and use it rightly. I believe we are at a great disadvantage at the Supper if we are holding things selfishly and thereby hindered from ascending.
G.McK. Do you refer to material or spiritual substance?
W.J.H. Both, but specially material things.
G.S. Mary’s communications to the two disciples were responsible for the two disciples running to the sepulchre.
W.J.H. Yes. What a woman of influence she was, she could move them quickly! We should tarry a little at this matter of Mary and her substance. I think some have an idea that some mysterious thing happens when we come together, but what does happen is inseparable from our state. There is nothing mysterious in that sense.
J.M. Is that why the thought of measure is introduced in the scripture in Kings?
W.J.H. Quite so. The Lord says “Measure the temple of God and the altar and them that worship therein” (@Revelation 11: 1). The persons are measured according to their state.
C.D. Mary’s state was represented by what she brought, not by what she found. It is what we bring that counts. The wise men came and opened their treasures.
W.J.H. Quite so. It is a question in this setting as to what we are doing and what we have. If we would move steadily upward
{67}
on the first day of the week, the first thing is that the power of evil must be broken in our souls. The next thing is that our substance is now not held for ourselves, self no longer in control; and the third thing seen in the nineteenth chapter is that Mary stood by the cross of Jesus, that is she accepted the break with the world, for that is what the cross of Jesus does, it establishes in her heart a complete break with the world system.
J.D. It mentions in the first verse Mary Magdalene only, but speaking to Peter and John she says “*we* know not where they have laid Him.” Did you have that in view as to not having ourselves before us?
W.J.H. Very good. She is in her mind with her brethren, and she influences Peter and John.
C.P.P. Is she a Corinthian sister there, as saying “*the* Lord?” “They have taken away *the* Lord.” Her words to the two angels “They have taken away *my* Lord” would indicate she is a true Roman.
W.J.H. That is very helpful. The Lord’s choice of her is justified. The selection of Mary was deliberate; it is because her Roman and Corinthian positions were right so that the Lord can disclose Himself to her as risen on a new level. We cannot know what it is for Him to assemble with us as risen if our individual and collective responsible positions
{68}
are not right.
V.D. As to ministering to Him, does not the fact that she was on that line account for her being at the tomb? According to Mark she is there with two other women with their spices.
W.J.H. Yes; she was still on the line of ministering to Him; that seems to me to precede assembling. The seven demons are gone out and what she has is now held for the Lord, and then there has been a complete break with the world by standing at the cross of Jesus, that seems to be the general underlying condition of her soul. On the first day of the week she comes to the sepulchre weeping, that is, she genuinely misses the Lord.
C.D. Would you suggest that at that point she is on her way to the middle floor?
W.J.H. She is near the winding staircase. She comes on the first day of the week to the sepulchre with deep sorrow as missing the Lord. I believe the Lord is drawn to such as come together genuinely missing Him and wanting Him.
A.H.S. Would those characteristics in Mary be what we would look for in those who desire to remember the Lord?
W.J.H. I think that is a good suggestion. (1) They are not controlled by evil; (2) they are not controlled by self, and (3) they are
{69}
not controlled by the world. Such will be found genuinely missing Christ.
C.D. Would you say spirit, soul and body are each rightly controlled in the three ways you have mentioned?
W.J.H. “Your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless” (@1 Thessalonians 5: 23). Every floor of the individual held in its right relation with God.
G.H.McK. Have you anything to say why she came in the early morning while it was still dark?
W.J.H. I think it is the urgency of love, in keeping with Abigail of whom when she knew David’s rights had been challenged, it says “She hastened.” There was urgency on her part to see that David had his due, and I think there is the urgency of love here, as conscious that the Lord is absent.
C.D. Is it not a link here with the Song of Solomon? “Until the day break ... I will get me to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense” -- such an one is ready, suitable to move with Him -- “Thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee” (chapter 4: 6, 7).
W.J.H. The mountain of myrrh and this sepulchre are kindred thoughts, the volume of suffering love suggested by the mountain of myrrh is seen in the death and burial of Jesus. The two angels in white are part
{70}
of the instruction. Mary is one side, she comes weeping, but the other side is that heavenly intelligences are sitting contemplating the fact that He has been into the grave. They know He is not there but He has been there; His holy head of the finest gold and His feet also of fine gold have been there; one sits at the head and the other at the feet where the body of Jesus had lain. I believe all these thoughts are to be in mind as we come together to the Supper.
Ques. Did not the Lord show His urgency in rising early; He had risen before Mary got there?
W.J.H. Undoubtedly He was watching Mary with the greatest interest, as He does now each first day of the week, watching the gatherings of the saints, observing not merely what is external but what is really in our hearts.
V.D. You spoke of the angels as representing the intelligence of the saints?
W.J.H. I do not think Mary presents the side of intelligence in this matter but deep affection for Christ, so precious to the Lord, but the two angels in white bring in the side of intelligence and purity, and they are seen sitting where His head and feet *had* been. As coming together we would have Mary’s feelings as missing the Lord, but the angels¬ intelligence as to the position and their holy
{71}
contemplation of himself as to where He has been.
G.A. Do we find that confirmed in the words “She stooped down into the tomb”? What a woman would naturally shrink from to the greatest possible degree, a woman with spiritual feelings does.
W.J.H. Exactly. That action and her words “I will take Him away” show the intensity of her love; even if dead she would have Him. The Lord was listening to all this, indeed He drew out these expressions of love.
A.B.J. Such feelings as Mary had do not arise from impulse but are with us during the week. So that as we come together our affections are given rein to on that occasion.
W.J.H. Some of us this morning were thinking of the word “A time to love” (@Ecclesiastes 3: 8). I believe the Lord would have us unlock our affections more than we do. Mary unlocks her heart, she is not ashamed to do so.
D.T. Is Mary ready then for the winding staircase when she turns round and says “Master?”
W.J.H. She has put her feet on the upward steps, all being right on the ground floor with Mary.
G.S. Would you emphasise what you have said about contemplation? It is there the
{72}
saints acquire holy sensibilities with a view to negotiating this spiral staircase.
W.J.H. What thoughts must have gone through the minds of these heavenly visitors, for they knew much of the glory of Christ represented by His head. The Song of Solomon tells us His head is as the finest gold. They knew something of His feet -- feet set on pillars of marble; yet such an one has been into the grave.
C.G. The two disciples going back to their home miss this appearing. What have you in mind in relation to this?
W.J.H. It all intensifies the fact that nothing could satisfy Mary but finding the Lord, not even her home. The Lord is looking that nothing else contents till we find Him.
Ques. I was wondering if we rightly partake of the loaf and the cup it would strengthen us to move upward from floor to floor.
W.J.H. Very good. “Take eat,” the Lord says. The bread is to strengthen the heart; the affections strengthened thus so that we can begin the ascent. Mary was ready for this so that she turns round. The Lord says “Mary.” He is not on the ground floor but on the resurrection platform; she is to learn she cannot have Him back again in flesh and blood. What a moment, however, when she
{73}
recognises Him as risen!
C.D. Does the Lord recognise her on this upward movement in that he addresses her personally “Mary,” not “Mary Magdalene”?
W.J.H. She will never be Magdalene in the resurrection world. She is Mary now, everything is on another level, including her knowledge of the Lord.
E.T. I was wondering what could correspond with the Lord saying “Mary”? Would we get the sense as together that the Lord addresses us in a particular way?
W.J.H. We get the sense that He has come in -- a wonderful moment. He has come; He is not present in that sense when we come together, but there is a moment when He comes in, the saints know it.
E.T. It would be unmistakable to one who loves Him.
G.H. The entrance to the middle floor was on the right of the house. When the Lord addresses Mary by her own personal name, is she at the entrance then to the middle storey?
W.J.H. Yes. She is arriving there. When we come in touch with the Lord risen, we are at the second storey. The Lord assembled thus with them during forty days. Every day of the forty the brethren would come together looking for the Lord to come in as the risen one, they learn thus to know Him
{74}
as beyond this scene.
T.E. It says He appeared unto them *living* for forty days.
W.J.H. Not living in the old conditions, but *living* and who would have missed one of those forty days?
T.E. Those forty days will carry right through to the end.
W.J.H. The forty days establish the reality of His resurrection and power to disclose Himself to them.
C.G. In temple service it might suggest we touch the resurrection sphere in our movements before we move to the heavenly sphere.
W.J.H. Surely. There is this middle storey -- the sphere of resurrection.
C.P.P. Does that stress the importance of a period after the Supper for contemplation of the Lord Himself personally and His greatness and His glory, prior to moving further?
W.J.H. I am glad you have said that. The liberty now enjoyed to speak to the Lord for a time after the Supper has been a great relief to many. The Lord lost much prior to this and the liberty of many was taken away. The moment represented by the Lord saying “Mary” when she turns round and says “Rabboni” is not to be overlooked. It has been restored to us, thank God.
{75}
G.A. Does the scripture in Ezekiel link on with what you are speaking of? “Therefore the house had width upward, and so ascended [from] the lower [story] to the upper, by the middle one” (@Ezekiel 41: 7 -- N.T.).
W.J.H. It is exactly the same thought transferred to the coming day. What an expanse resurrection gives you! No walls hinder the Lord then, He comes in, the doors being shut -- there are no restrictions in the resurrection world, there are many restrictions here.
C.D. I was thinking of this matter of turning. We have it twice here. Mary turned backward, it says, and John in Patmos turned to see the voice that spoke. Is not that important for ourselves? Naturally we are facing the wrong direction. “Blest Lord Thou spakest” -- that is what caused the turning.
W.J.H. Do you not think her direction was right up to that point; her direction was towards the sepulchre, but once He speaks her direction is altered entirely, she turns round when she knows it is the Lord. When the Lord comes in, it is a matter now for Him to speak to us and its to speak to Him.
J.D. Why does it say she said it in Hebrew?
W.J.H. The meaning of the word “Hebrew” is not quite clear but it is probably
{76}
the language of the “passer-over.” She is now passing over -- it is the language of one passing over from one realm to another -- the language of God’s people, of course -- not the language of the world.
C.D. In her saying “Teacher” she is really ready for the next move.
W.J.H. Quite so. She is now ready to be instructed how she may pass to the third floor.
A.H.S. The second floor is the enjoyment of relationship with Christ as Head. Christ as the risen Man, not yet the ascended One.
W.J.H. Yes. As risen in touch with His people.
G.McK. You were saying that the first floor to a certain extent is marked by restrictions.
W.J.H. Yes. There is more room as we move upwards.
G.McK. Being still in the world and knowing the meaning of the cross, we are restricted. As we meet others we have to be restrained, but as we touch the resurrection side we are in a large place.
W.J.H. That is it. A large *upper* room furnished.
G.A. How can we be helped to get a touch from the Lord so that we may not stay unduly at this point and miss the third floor?
{77}
W.J.H. That is a wholesome exercise and I think what has been said touches it. Mary says “Teacher.” We have to be taught for it is a great matter how we are to go to the third storey. The Lord does not send the saints to glory, He brings them, He is with them and leads them. If He had sent them He would leave them, but it says “Bringing many sons to glory” (@Hebrews 2: 10). The way God brings us to glory is by Christ being with us as “leader.” He brings us to God, He does not send us to God; He brings us to glory, and that is really the bearing of this message to Mary, “Go to My brethren and say to them ‘I ascend to my Father and your Father’.” He associates them with Himself thus.
A.B.J. In connection with that, sometimes we get hymns addressed to the Lord as ascended in glory in the latter part of the meeting, and yet if we are assured that He comes to us, would He not remain with us? Would we not address Him as being with us, and not put Him at a distance, and through a hymn address Him as far from us? It is something we often notice amongst us. Could you help us?
W.J.H. I think what was just said touched that point, that He is *with* the sons that are brought to glory. He does not send us to the Father, but He takes us as the One
{78}
who ascends.
C.D. Will there be any difficulty if we come under His leading, giving Him His place, saying “Teacher” to Him? It is His matter to take us there. The One who said “No man cometh unto the Father but by Me” will surely take us there if we are subject to His leading, subject to His control.
L.G.L. “I rejoiced when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of Jehovah” (@Psalm 122). Lower down he speaks of Jerusalem, “To give thanks unto the name of Jehovah! For there are set thrones for judgment, the thrones of the house of David.” There seems to be an ascending line.
W.J.H. Indeed. The thought of the Songs of Degrees is one of gradual ascent step by step.
J.N.G. Would the recognition of the Lord as Teacher make room for a word from Him in view of movement?
W.J.H. Yes. That is instructive. He may help as to this matter of the third storey by a word of instruction from the Teacher, a word that will stimulate the brethren to go up.
W.A. The Lord is seen standing in @John 20; not sitting as in the thirteenth chapter.
W.J.H. Sitting involves a prolonged position, but standing is a temporary one in view of movement. A word sometimes definitely
{79}
helps the brethren to proceed upward. What moments if we reach what is represented by the third storey! “My God and your God” I think is the highest spiritual elevation ever reached. The holy city comes from such a height, it comes down out of heaven *from My God*.
T.F. The Lord spoke in the thirteenth John that they might have part with Him.
W.J.H. Having that in view He washed their feet so that they may be free to move on to what He says from the fourteenth to the seventeenth chapters -- the Father’s house, and the Lord Himself speaking to the Father.
J.S.B. You referred to allowing our affections to be unlocked. In such a spiritual elevation there would be spiritual emotions and this might find expression in a more responsive amen.
W.J.H. Yes, indeed, a response much needed. The emotions of Mary are unlocked in her tears as missing the Lord; secondly they are unlocked on the second floor when she says “Rabboni.” Brief indeed, but what depth! The affections are unlocked in the third floor in the cry “Abba, Father.” It is a cry and a cry involves deep feelings in the heart. The Lord lifted up His eyes to heaven and said “Father” (@John 17: 1).
C.P.P. Does the thought of brethren belong to the second floor and is an apprehension
{80}
of the truth of that a necessity before we can approach the Father?
W.J.H. I think on the second floor you get the saints¬ relations with Christ well established in the heart, and His personal glory. Colossians unfolds this. What a theme to fill our hearts! But Ephesians speaks of the God of our Lord Jesus Christ and the Father of glory.
V.T.S. Do we get the Lord’s desire for us to move up to the third storey as He says to Mary “Touch Me not”?
W.J.H. Quite so. She for the moment would have liked to retain the Lord on the ground floor, but even the second floor is not the final thought. There is still a higher realm. He would have us know that there is still another realm. “Go tell my brethren, I ascend to my Father and your Father and my God and your God.”
C.D. In Kings the third floor is seven cubits broad.
W.J.H. Seven is finality and completeness. We come to the great terminus of God’s thoughts in the third storey.
G.A. The seventeenth John would give us an impression of “my Father and your Father.” What had you in mind as to the further thought “my God and your God.”
W.J.H. My impression is the thought “My God and your God” brings before our hearts
{81}
what has been called the border of the infinite. Beyond that elevation is the realm of the infinite, “far above all the heavens.” There is a realm above the third heaven which no creature can enter, but I believe “My God and your God” presents the highest conception of God that can ever be known in any measure, by men.
{82}
WHAT IS ACCEPTABLE TO GOD
@Genesis 4: 3 -- 7; @Exodus 2: 23 -- 25; @Psalm 51: 15 -- 17; @Romans 12: 1, 2
The thought in mind in reading these passages, is to speak a little of what is acceptable to God. The first scripture indicates that God had respect to Abel’s offering, or He looked on it as worthy of His notice. The second scripture tells us that God looked upon the children of Israel in their bondage and He heard their groan, and it says, “He had respect unto them” (@Exodus 2: 25). The third scripture tells us of something that God does not despise (which is the negative way of speaking of this same matter), a sacrifice that God looks at -- meaning that He values it. The fourth scripture tells us of another sacrifice, and as presented to God it is acceptable to him -- “holy, acceptable unto God which is your intelligent service” (@Romans 12: 1).
It seems to me that much today depends on whether there is anything about us that is of any value to God. One cherishes the thought that there is, and that there will be. In the days of Malachi, when the public conditions were such that God was offered the lame and the diseased of the flocks, and
{83}
when every service that was done in His house was for gain, not even the door being opened for nought; and when God’s word was challenged at every point. God raising questions and receiving insolent answers; it was in *that* period that God speaks about jewels, about His having precious treasure for Himself. In that dark, dark day, in which God did not in any way overlook what was going on, He also found something that He calls His special treasure, something that is peculiarly precious. He will yet make up His special treasures, and some of them were secured in the closing days of Israel’s history prior to the coming of the Lord.
So it is in the close of the church’s history, the last four addresses to the assemblies in Asia covering the history of the closing period (and what a history!) -- Jezebel active, her teaching listened to, teaching spiritual fornication and idolatry, a condition of death existent; a name to live but dead -- a condition too nauseous to Christ, for He says, “I would thou wert cold or hot” (@Revelation 3: 15) -- at that very time, what else is there? Certain ones who have not defiled their garments of whom the Lord says, “They shall walk with Me in white” (@Revelation 3: 4). Think of persons at that time walking with the Lord, not He walking with them -- He may do that in grace with anyone -- but persons who walk
{84}
with Him in white “for they are worthy”; overcomers also to whom the Lord promises they will sit with Him in His throne; so precious are they to the Lord that they will sit with Him where He sits, having His companionship in a most exalted position. But greater still, persons to whom He can convey the very greatest thoughts in the universe for man -- “Him that overcometh,” the Lord says, “will I make a pillar in the temple of My God” (@Revelation 3: 12) -- the most exalted view of the temple in scripture. “And I will write upon him the name of My God” -- the most exalted conception of God that could ever be known! “And the name of the city of My God ... which cometh down out of heaven from My God” -- the most exalted conception of the assembly in scripture! “And My new Name” -- the most exalted Name that Jesus bears, shared with some in the dark, dark days at the close of the church’s history. Should we not long to be in some little way thus available to the Lord?
With these thoughts in mind I have read these passages that our hearts may desire to have something that God will respect. I believe we can count on God that at this period in the history of the assembly, and the history of the world, if there is something that is of value to Him He will preserve it -- I do not say necessarily in a physical sense,
{85}
but He certainly will not allow what is of value to Him to be destroyed morally, or be submerged. The great question for us to face is, are we contributing anything that God will value? How Much reversal of natural thoughts is needed, for “that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God” (@Luke 16: 15). God does not value what men value. That word is a searching one, “That which is highly esteemed among men is abomination to God,” and the reverse is true, that what God highly esteems is often regarded as worthless by men. This is seen in our Lord Jesus; how highly esteemed He was by God; by the angelic host; by the prophets; by Gabriel the angel who stands before God. God speaks of Him as *My* beloved Son -- He claims Him, it is a possessive thought, “This is My beloved Son in Whom I have found My delight” (@Matthew 3: 17 N.T.). Scripture speaks of Him also as “*My* King,” God possessing Him as His King to rule. “Yet have I set My King” (@Psalm 2: 6), He says. He also speaks of Him as “*My* Shepherd” (@Zechariah 13: 7) -- the One Who, as His Shepherd, cares for His flock. He is called also “*His* Anointed” (@Psalm 2: 2). All this and much more shows how highly esteemed He is. But such an One has been set aside as worthless by men, He was not esteemed, “When we shall see Him there is
{86}
no beauty that we should desire Him. He is despised and rejected of men; a Man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief” (@Isaiah 53: 3). The One God has highly esteemed, highly exalted, is not esteemed in this world, so that we have much to learn as to what is acceptable.
How beautiful to open the fourth of Genesis (after the sad history of man’s sin in seizing what God ordered should be reserved) and see, so soon afterwards a man who comes with an acceptable offering to God, not to steal something but to offer God something. It is a magnificent suggestion -- God, the Supreme, the Infinite, the Eternal, the Possessor of heaven and earth -- what titles! -- and here is a man, soon after the fall, that would like to offer God something. What can he bring? What he brought, God respected. “God had respect to Abel and to his offering.” Mark that -- “God had respect to *Abel* and his offering.” Let no one think his offering can be respected without its relation to the offerer being established. We sometimes hear offerings of praise and thanksgiving and prayer, but even we cannot say “Amen” because of the person. We cannot separate the offering from the person, and sometimes its value is lost because of what the person is; but when Abel came with his offering God looked at Abel, He had respect to Abel; righteous Abel.
{87}
Let no one go on in unrighteousness and think his offering can ever be accepted by God. But righteous Abel brings an offering and God looks at the offering and He respects it, it is of value to Him. How wonderful that is! Abel brought the firstlings of his flock, the *first*, dear brethren, not the last -- not Malachi’s diseased and lame. Adam and Eve put themselves first, but now here is a man who puts God first. “The first of the flock,” Abel says, “is for God.” Does this not measure us, the first for God? God respects that. Here is a man who says, “as my flocks increase, the firstling is to be for God.” “And the fat thereof”; all the inward excellence is for God, not for me. Adam says “*me*” -- the whole world is built up on that; “The lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life” (@1 John 2: 16). Abel says, “*God* first,” the inward excellence included. God has great respect for that. I know, of course, it refers to the sacrifice of Christ typically, for where will you see One Who thought first for God like Jesus? His very coming into manhood had God in mind. Taking a bondman’s form and becoming obedient, God was first with Jesus ever. Then think of the inward excellence of Christ. One loves to think of His outward excellence, to hear the words of His mouth -- every word excellent; to watch the movements of His
{88}
hands -- every movement excellent; to follow His blessed steps -- every step excellent. But what shall we say of the fat thereof, the inward excellence of Jesus? What a theme that is! Some of us may stand some external examination, but what are we within? The Psalmist says, “all that is *within me* bless His holy Name” (@Psalm 103: 1). Can we? One has thought of the way Abraham took the sacrifices and divided them, setting piece against piece, so that all that was within should be laid bare. Then the smoking furnace comes down but it does not consume anything, intense fire moves between the pieces but nothing is consumed. Then the burning lamp comes, the light of the Spirit of God. Who sees everything so perfectly, it moves between the pieces but it does not expose anything but the excellence thereof.
What stands out in the first Scripture read is a man in keeping with the thought of the first for God, and the thought of inward excellence; he has judged within himself what is not in keeping with his offering. As our souls are brought under the influence of Christ and His holy sacrifice, we come, in some little measure, into correspondence with it. The almighty, glorious, infinite Creator accepts an offering because He values it. If there is something rendered to God in reality today in countries so devastated by war, God
{89}
will respect His people and their offerings. Are we maintained in bringing something to God that speaks of Christ, so that God can respect us and our offering?
I would refer to the scene in Exodus where God looked on His people in all their sorrow, their groaning. He hears the groaning, and it says He had respect unto them. One has thought of this at the present time; think of the groans, think of the sorrow, the desolation in which God’s people are sharing on the other side of the world. Will God not do for us what He did for them, does He not hear the groan, the cry? It depends on whether He can respect us. He had respect unto them. Why? Because they were the sons of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. It says, “God remembered His covenant with Abraham, with Isaac and with Jacob” (@Exodus 2: 24). Though in such distress, suffering and desolation, they were sons of Abraham. What marks such? Faith in God, obedience to God, sons of Abraham the friend of God. Will God not respect such persons? He will, if it be that faith is there and obedience is there, and conditions that God can recognise as entitling them to friendship. God respects the children of Abraham. There they were the children of Isaac, the heavenly man, the one who dwelt in the south country -- a figure of Christ in that character. If there are heavenly ones
{90}
going through suffering and distress, will not God respect heavenly ones, for they are the sons of Isaac? It says, “As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly” (@1 Corinthians 15: 48). What would God not do for the sons of Isaac? He will listen to their cry. Then the sons of Jacob, the man who had to learn the truth that Esau is to be supplanted, the first man is to be supplanted -- what a life lesson that is! Not in others only, but in himself. He reaches it at last, “I know it my son I know it” (@Genesis 48: 19). Do we all know that Esau must give place to Jacob, that Ishmael must give place to Isaac, Cain to Abel, that Reuben must give place to Joseph? “I know it my son I know it”; Manasseh must give place to Ephraim. The sons of Jacob learn this great lesson, through discipline. Jacob had to learn it through a life of discipline, but he learnt it. Our brethren in Europe are in an iron furnace at this moment -- what a furnace it is! Will God respect them? Will He hear their groan, their cries? If they are the sons of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, God will respect them and He will find a way out for them. “I am come down to deliver them” (@Exodus 3: 8). God remembers what Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were to Him.
If we are likewise tested, if the iron furnace comes to us, will it find us truly the sons of
{91}
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob? The value of our groan and cry will depend upon whether we have a relationship with these great men spiritually, and if we have, God will listen to the groaning. I believe He is listening at this time. One is confident that God is not deaf to the groaning and the cries of those who bear somewhat the features of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob today.
I pass on to @Psalm 51, where we have the thought of another sacrifice that God will not despise. There is much that He despises; there is much, one is sure (and humbled about it, I trust) that is of no value at all in what goes on in christendom and often, I fear, among us. Think of the Pharisee’s prayer, “God I thank Thee that I am not as other men are” (@Luke 18: 11). How God would despise that! But the prayer, “God be merciful to me a sinner” (@Luke 18: 13), God did not despise, He respected it. So David indicates in this Psalm that “The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, Thou wilt not despise” (@Psalm 51: 17). I doubt whether He will respect anything from us until we bring such sacrifices. One is conscious in oneself, and in others too, that there is a great deal of Pharisaism about us. We may not use those words, but is that not often with us -- “God I thank Thee I am not as other
{92}
men are”? That self complacent spirit does not yield anything to God. He accepts such an offering, a broken heart, a heart that feels things. The Lord speaks of His own heart being broken, “Reproach,” He says, “has broken My heart” (@Psalm 69: 20). I He was ready to die with sorrow. Not because of His actions but as feeling how God was reproached. The apostle respected the sorrow of the repentant man in Corinth (@2 Corinthians 2: 7). Some might say, “Look what he did”! Yes, but look what David did! God does not despise the broken and contrite heart. Do we? How do we think of such as David? Who would have thought that man would become the sweet psalmist of Israel, that God would entrust him with the service of song? There is joy in heaven over one repenting sinner; the proper word is *repenting*, not historical repentance, but characteristic repentance -- a *repenting* sinner. “More than over ninety and nine just persons who need no repentance.” It does not say those ninety and nine did not yield anything at all to heaven, but ninety and nine of such together do not bring heaven such joy as one repenting sinner. So where one who has sinned brings the sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart, God respects that sacrifice, He puts great value on it. It is most instructive to see what God is prepared to do for persons who approach
{93}
Him with ashes. What do ashes mean? The acknowledgment that such persons have found in themselves what has had to be burnt. Such do not say, “God I thank Thee I am not as other men are.” What will God not do for such? Think of Abraham, he says, “I am but dust and ashes” (@Genesis 18: 27). God will listen to the prayers of such. If a man comes to God in the acknowledgment that he is ashes, God will listen to that man. Think of Job, who repented in dust and ashes. God will restore to that man twice as much as he had before. So will He bless him. Think of the king of Nineveh who sat in ashes; God will suspend judgment when such take that place. Think of Mordecai, a man who put on sackcloth with ashes. God will providentially come in and preserve His people from destruction where there is a Mordecai. Think of Daniel who put on sackcloth and sat in ashes; God will communicate what He is going to do to such a man. How that disposes of the Pharisaical spirit. It is a man with ashes that God will regard. You say, “What about his past”? Never mind his past if there are ashes. God will trust such a person for He does not despise the broken and contrite heart.
Now a word as to the last scripture which bears on every one of us. Think of the apostle beseeching. Should we not lend our ears and
{94}
our hearts to the apostle’s entreaties, the apostle of the Gentiles, the one to whom we, as Gentiles, owe so much? He beseeches. What does he beseech? That we present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. You say, “Will God accept my body”? The Spirit of God tells us in Romans what men have done with their bodies. What a use has been made of the body and its members! No fear of God before the eyes, the throat an open sepulchre, the poison of asps under their lips, with their tongues they have used deceit, hands that shed innocent blood, feet that run to mischief. God will never accept such a body. Nevertheless. He wants our bodies in spite of what we have been. Let us look back and see what we have done with our bodies. How ashamed we are. Will God work in us so that He can accept our bodies, so that as the body is presented to Him it can be acceptable? Yes, dear brethren. Think of the woman of the city, a sinner. What had she done with her body? The Lord Jesus knew but He could accept that body, repentance having intervened. He can accept what comes from her eyes, those tears. He can accept the kisses of her mouth. He can accept the use of her hair. He can accept the service of her hands. He can direct those feet and say to her “Go in peace.” Oh, how wonderful that God
{95}
wants our bodies. Think of Mary Magdalene in like manner. Seven demons had controlled her body, which means she was completely controlled by Satanic influences; but the Lord operating and casting them out attached her heart to Himself and He can accept the service of her hands; she ministered to Him, she followed Him with her feet. In @John 20 He can put a word in her ear, and can use her mind, for she carries a message that has been put in her ear, in her mind, and she tells the disciples these things. He can use her mouth and her feet, for He said, “Go to My brethren and say to them.” So with Saul of Tarsus. To what use he had put his body! A mind that verily thought that he ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus; feet at which the clothes of the young men that stoned Stephen were laid, feet, too, that had taken him into the houses of the saints to hale them to prison. Think of what God afterwards did with the body of Paul. Think of the mind He took possession of. He says, “We have the mind of Christ” (@1 Corinthians 2: 6). He had power to think as Christ thinks. What a change! Think of what came from the lips of the beloved apostle; think of the service of his hands, “These hands have ministered to my necessities” (@Acts 20: 54). Think of the feet that carried him about in the service of Christ.
{96}
So he speaks to us, “I beseech you therefore brethren by the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God which is your intelligent service” (@Romans 12: 1). In spite of what the past had been, God is prepared to accept our bodies, there being repentance and cleansing. “Bodies washed with pure water” (@Hebrews 10: 22). The influence of Christ’s death is pure water.
