{#WHAT GOD HAS JOINED TOGETHER}
{1}
PRAYER, AS PROVIDING THE SOLUTION OF EVERY MATTER
@John 11: 38 - 44; @Genesis 18: 23 - 33; @Deuteronomy 9: 12 - 19; @1 Samuel 7: 5-10; @James 5: 16 - 18; @Daniel 2: 14 - 23
I have read these scriptures just to bring out this thought, that there is no situation so dreadful but it can be met if only we get the divine ear. I speak first, and rightly so, of our blessed Lord. What a situation confronted Him! One that He loved was in the grave; had been dead four days, and the stone was at the mouth of the grave. How is a situation like that to be met? I know, of course, that the Lord meets it by the power that is in Himself inherently as “the resurrection”; for He says, “I am the resurrection,” @John 11: 25. But the other side is that He is heard. He stands in the presence of that situation, and He lifts up His eyes to heaven and says, “Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me; but I knew that thou always hearest me.” No one else could say that -- “I knew that thou always hearest me; but on account of the crowd who stand around I have said it.” He says this that we might get the gain of what He is doing; that we may understand that the situation, however dreadful, can be met if only we get the divine ear. Martha says, “Lord, he stinks already, for he is four days there,” verse 39. However dreadful the conditions may be in any town, it can be met if we can get the divine ear. The word to us is, “I am Jehovah ... is there anything too hard for me?” @Jeremiah 32: 27.
{2}
What is it, dear brethren, that makes it possible that we should be heard? Well, firstly, it is as we are entirely committed to the will of God in any matter. If we will accept that in our measure, He will hear us. The Lord Jesus said personally, “My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me, and that I should finish his work,” @John 4: 34. The Lord approached this matter in relation to the will of God, and He said, “This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God,” verse 4. He is committed to the will and glory of God at all costs. I would like to say this to you, That there is nothing impossible in any locality if we will commit ourselves solely to the will of God and His glory. If that is really and truly governing us, God will listen to us and give us what we ask. John says, “And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we have asked of him,” @1 John 5: 15. The Lord says, “Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me,” then He says, “Lazarus, come forth,” verse 43. The position seemed utterly impossible, but it was met by One who was heard.
Now let us consider men of like passions with us, whom heaven heard. If God was prepared to hear them, is He not prepared to hear us? Surely, if God was prepared to hear Abraham, Moses, Samuel, Elijah, Daniel, then He is prepared to hear us. Indeed, the situation that exists today, the privilege, the blessing, and the food, is the consequence of some one being heard. There are those, one says humbly, to whom heaven listens; and we all want to come into the ranks, in every locality, of those who have the divine ear.
So we have Abraham. God is standing there listening to Abraham, and communing with him;
{3}
Abraham making requests and God listening from point to point, as Abraham travels downward from fifty to ten. The communion is only stopped when Abraham stops. God did not break it off. Abraham went as far as he felt he could go, and then he ceased; and God was ready to grant him every request. Now let us enquire, What is there in Abraham that thus secured the ear of God? -- for he was a man like us. The position was that a whole city was threatened with destruction; and in that city there were brethren. There was Lot -- Abraham’s brother -- and his household; and that city was facing imminent destruction, and Abraham prays. He is not part of Sodom; he dwelt in Mamre. He is entirely outside, and free from the atmosphere of Sodom. He has judged in himself what is in Sodom; so that as he draws near to God who is about to turn those cities into ashes, he says, “I, who am dust and ashes,” @Genesis 18: 27, which means that I have judged in myself what you are going to look into in Sodom. Now God will listen to that man. Abraham spoke to God in his prayer, as much as to say, I have been in the fire and reduced to ashes in myself what you are going to judge in Sodom. God listened and He will listen to us if we are apart from what is evil in any place, *as having judged the thing in ourselves*. Now I commend that word to every one. We may pray and pray and pray, and God will not hear us if we pray as superior to the persons or the place involved. But if we pray as having judged in ourselves what God abhors, then God will listen to us and give us what we ask.
Now we come to Moses. What was imminent in his day was that a whole nation was to be destroyed; not only a city but a nation. God says
{4}
to Moses, “And now let me alone, that my anger may burn,” @Exodus 32: 10. “Let me alone.” Did it not suggest that Moses might not let God alone? -- that Moses might intervene between God and the judgment? God says to him, “I may consume them; and I will make of thee a great nation.” What an appeal, dear brethren, to the human heart that was! But Moses does not let God alone; he said to God, “Why should the Egyptians speak, and say, For misfortune he has brought them out, to slay them on the mountains, and to annihilate them from the face of the earth?” @Exodus 32: 12. and in another place he says, “lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, Because Jehovah was not able to bring them into the land which he had promised them, and because he hated them, he hath brought them out to kill them in the wilderness,” @Deuteronomy 9: 28. Again he tells the people, “I stood upon the mountain according to the former days, forty days and forty nights; and Jehovah listened unto me also at that time,” @Deuteronomy 10: 10. What a wonderful sight that is! -- a man intervening between God and the judgment of the whole nation. God had said, “Let me alone,” but Moses pleaded the name and glory of God. He was free from any self-interest, God had offered him personal glory, but Moses said, No; Your name will be affected, Your glory will be tarnished; and he tells us that “Jehovah listened to me also at that time.” What we may learn, dear brethren, is that if we are free from self-interest, self-glory, self-seeking, and have God before us and His glory, God will listen to us in any matter.
Samuel is another man whom God heard many times. His very birth was on that principle “asked of God” is the meaning of his name.
{5}
What was imminent in Samuel’s case was that the Philistines would get control of Israel; that
what is natural -- man’s mind -- would supersede what is spiritual. The Philistine represents the natural mind dominating and controlling the realm of what is spiritual, and it was imminent that the people would fall into their power. Israel were greatly afraid, and they come to Samuel and say, “Cease not to cry to Jehovah our God for us,” @1 Samuel 7: 8. In another place Samuel says, “far be it from me that I should sin against Jehovah in ceasing to pray for you,” chapter 12: 23. He said this even in spite of what they did in rejecting him. Now, with the Philistines at the door -- and how many times the Philistines stand at the door, dear brethren, in our day -- and it looks as if the power of the natural mind would sweep through the land and what is really spiritual, emanating from the Spirit of God, would be set aside. But Samuel prayed, and how does he pray? He prays, dear brethren, as wholly dependent. There is the Philistine with his giants, and his great head and his mighty weapons and his coat of mail, and Samuel is praying with a little suckling lamb in his hands, presenting it to God -- a suckling lamb that could not live without a supply from another, the very personification of dependence. If there is a truly dependent man, consciously needing resources from Another, from God, from Christ, God will listen to that man. Jehovah answered Samuel, “and Jehovah thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them; and they were routed before Israel,” verse 10. We have seen it in our day, thank God! -- some great thunderings in the Philistines¬ camp, consequent upon a Samuel
{6}
drawing near to God in true dependence in the spirit of a suckling lamb, pouring water out before God in the acknowledgment of absolute weakness, and God in heaven listens and answers. I suggest these thoughts that they may serve to stimulate our hearts to prayer and to conditions that God may hear us.
Of Elijah, James says that he was a man of like passions with us, so it is intended to be a word of encouragement for us. James tells us that Elijah “prayed with prayer that it should not rain; and it did not rain upon the earth three years and six months,” chapter 5: 17. He saw conditions in which it was imminent that the whole nation would pass over to idolatry and apostasy. That is what was threatening, and Elijah discerned that the only thing that would save them would be a period of intense discipline. So he prays earnestly and the heavens were shut up, and a period of great privation came upon Israel. It was to save them from apostasy, that is what Elijah prayed for, and he himself was prepared to suffer with them. He did not go about blaming the people, complaining, and comparing that area with another area. He suffered with the people, thankful to accept what there was by divine ordering -- day by day, morning and evening, dependent on the ravens. Then the widow with a little meal and a little oil maintains him, but Elijah suffered without murmuring. If it meant a period of leanness for Israel, he was with them in the suffering, in order that they might be brought back to God.
Then he prayed on another occasion. He was now in a little meeting, so to speak, where there was only a little, maybe, but it did not waste. The meal did not fail or the oil either till the Lord
{7}
gave rain. They may not have had wonderfully good times, as we speak, but they had enough; and there is always enough if Christ and the Spirit are recognised without any complaints. In that locality, the widow’s son dies, and the child is laid on Elijah’s bed; and he goes up and prays. Just think of that! Here is a dead child. What can anyone do? It says, Elijah prayed. What did he say? He asked God to send back that child’s spirit, and his spirit *did* come again, but before that blessed result was reached, the mother owns her sin. The root, dear brethren, of death coming into a place is the sin of those responsible. The mother says, “Art thou come to me to call mine iniquity to remembrance, and to slay my son?” @1 Kings 17: 18. The loss, too, of families is due to the sin of the parents, and there is no hope. You cannot pray until that is owned. Unless those responsible in any situation are honestly prepared to come right into the open and own their sin, it is impossible to really pray. When she acknowledges it, then this man of prayer kneels down and asks God to send life, and He does it.
I believe, dear brethren, in every locality where we mourn the loss of families, if the parents particularly will take on the shame of the sin as their own sin, then we have a basis on which the saints can pray. God will send back the spirit into the dead body and make the child to live. But while we put off the responsibility, or ignore it, prayer is hindered.
“He prayed again,” James says, “and the heaven gave rain, and the earth caused the fruit to spring forth.” He prayed at the sacrifice, “Answer me, Jehovah, answer me, that this people may know that thou Jehovah art God, and that thou hast
{8}
turned their heart back again,” @1 Kings 18: 37. And the fire comes down from heaven and consumes the sacrifice. And then he goes up again and prays with his head between his knees for a season of bounty and prosperity, and the heavens gave their rain; first in a very small way -- a cloud as big as a man’s hand to begin with, but it is heaven operating consequent upon the prayer of Elijah.
The secret of all this with Elijah is that though entirely unknown as to his previous history, it was known to God as being right. If we want God to listen to us, then what is secret, known only to God, must be right or else we cannot get the divine ear.
Well, Daniel also was a man accustomed to pray. When threatened with being cast into the lions¬ den, he opened his window towards Jerusalem three times a day and “prayed and gave thanks to God as he did aforetime.” He gave thanks as well as prayed. Such a man was Daniel! In this scripture the trouble that is imminent is that all wisdom is to disappear. All the wise men are to be slain. What a terrible thing if in New Jersey there was not a wise man left. That is what the devil would do, dispose of every trace of wisdom. Daniel speaks to his three friends, and they ask God for something that humanly is utterly impossible. Nebuchadnezzar had had a dream, and he had forgotten the dream, and he asked them to do the impossible, or he would slay them. How often an impossible situation presents itself, but Daniel and his friends go to their houses and pray, and the language of Daniel afterwards is magnificent. “I thank thee, and I praise thee, O God of my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me already
{9}
what we desired of thee; for thou hast made known unto us the king’s matter,” chapter 2: 23. What they had prayed for was granted to him.
Such a man is listened to in heaven. Why, dear brethren? Well, there are many reasons, no doubt, but one thing that is said of Daniel is that they could not find any fault with him except in relation to his God. Those presidents who were jealous of him, they had looked into his matters, they had gone to his office, they had gone to his home, and they had been through his ledger. They had been through his public matters in relation to the government, and they admitted that all was faultless. There was no hope of getting a charge that way. And, dear brethren, we want to take that home. If we want to be heard, our public responsibilities must be right; as our business and family matters are gone into, things are found to be right, for God sees everything. Daniel was faultless on all these matters. He and his friends were separate from the course of the world around them, living on pulse and water; that is to say, finding Christ sufficient for their food. If we are not satisfied with the pulse and water, and want the king’s meat, and prefer the food and joys of this world, we may have them; but heaven will not hear us. I commend Daniel to every one here, if we want heaven’s ear, we must have the pulse and water for food and drink; that is, Christ and the Spirit sufficient to build constitutions fairer and fatter than the king’s meat ever can. And then, things that others can investigate publicly must be right, as they were with Daniel.
You will see, dear brethren, that all these situations represent conditions that are impossible to men, but there is nothing that God will not do
{10}
for His people in any place, in any locality, or for any brother or sister, there is nothing that God is not ready to do, if we pray. But on our side, Can He listen to us? Have we conditions to entitle us to the divine ear? John says, “And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we have asked of him,” @1 John 5: 15. May the Lord help the dear brethren in this town to get the divine ear as to matters that have troubled them, and provide a moral basis for God to listen.
{11}
GARMENTS IN WHICH CHRIST APPEARS
@2 Kings 22: 12 - 14; @Luke 2: 8 - 14; @Revelation 19: 11 - 16
I should like to use this occasion, under the Lord’s hand, to stimulate in our hearts preparedness to receive varied impressions of the Lord. If He draws near to His people -- as He does, for He says, “I am coming to you,” @John 14: 18; that being the thought in His mind toward His people who can question that in His coming we should receive a wide range of impressions of Himself? “The tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits,” @Revelation 22: 2, suggests something like that, the “twelve manner” indicating the variety there is in that which comes from heaven.
So one had in mind to speak a little of the garments in which the Lord appears at various times. The thought of a garment, or vesture, has a great place with God, who Himself is the invisible God, “whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting,” @1 Timothy 6: 16. For ever, God remains the invisible God, but He is pleased, as to Himself, to suggest the idea of a garment, so that there might be
{12}
something that we can see, while, as to His own Being, He remains invisible. The physical universe is intended to be a testimony to God as Creator, so that men might apprehend His eternal power and divinity, @Romans 1: 20; that what may be known of Him should be seen. When the creation has effected the purpose for which it was intended, having conveyed what God desired should be known through it, God will fold it up as a vesture, @Hebrews 1: 12. God greatly desires that what can be seen of Himself should be seen; He has spread out the heavens; He has created the earth; He has brought forth its fulness, and He has created the sea and filled it with life, so that these things might impress us with His greatness.
Then the Psalmist speaks of God clothing Himself with light. It says, “Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment,” @Psalm 104: 2, so that, wherever He moves and wherever He acts, He remains invisible, yet this garment is seen, for light is there. We can be quite sure, dear brethren, that wherever God is acting, or moving, light must come in, for He ever works in the light, as we read, “God is light.” As He began in the creation in @Genesis 1, He said, “Let there be light.” The Psalmist, also, tells us, “he is clothed with majesty ... with strength,” @Psalm 93: 1, showing that clothing has a great place with God. Our bodies, indeed are said to
{13}
be clothing. Job says, “Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh,” @Job 10: 11. The human body in that sense is clothing for the spirit, clothing that God has made -- wonderful clothing. The apostle says, “not for that we would be unclothed,” @2 Corinthians 5: 4. Think of God making such clothing. “Let us make man” -- his body being clothing in which what he is might find expression, and indeed what God is, in whose image man was made, as He said, “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness,” @Genesis 1: 26.
With this thought in mind, and of how the Lord Jesus, having become Man, conveys a wide range of impressions of Himself to His people as He comes to them, I desire to speak of His garments, or at least some of them. We have the suggestion in @2 Kings 22 of a wardrobe and a keeper of it. I am not overlooking the fact that the Lord exhorted His servants to have only one coat, He Himself being the Model, whether He was surrounded by His lovers, or whether He was surrounded by His enemies, or whether He was alone with God. There is a sense in which He always appeared in the one coat. He was not like the chameleon; He did not change His colour according to His circumstances, which, alas! is sometimes the case with us. On the other hand, we have this thought of a wardrobe; and what a range of garments is in that wardrobe, carefully kept by; a keeper! No doubt the
{14}
prophetess, Huldah, who was the wife of the keeper of the wardrobe, ministered the thoughts of God in relation to that wardrobe. The Spirit of God connects her and her service with this thought of keeping the wardrobe, and so I would touch upon some scriptures in this setting.
One would earnestly commend the precious Scriptures, especially to the children and the young men and women. How many of us regret with all our hearts that we have not given more time to the Scriptures, that we do not know them better. The apostle said to Timothy, “from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures,” @2 Timothy 3: 15. One would earnestly entreat the young, under no circumstances to neglect the Scriptures; even if you do not understand them much, know them. Timothy knew them, even if he did not fully understand them, from his childhood.
So I want to refer to some of the garments in which the Lord appears in the Scriptures. Indeed, dear brethren, His body is in the nature of a garment. Scripture speaks of the body of Jesus, and heavenly beings are interested in it; for in the body of Jesus God was expressed, for God was manifested in the flesh. One of the most profound and wonderful things for our hearts to lay hold of is this manifestation, for it cannot be gainsaid that God was manifested. No wonder
{15}
the angels were profoundly interested. He was “seen of angels” -- no wonder the angels were in attendance, no wonder they contemplated what came into view in Jesus as He entered this world; and then when He was risen two of them were found, one at the head, and the other at the feet where the body of Jesus had lain. No wonder there were men and women who were drawn to Jesus and had peculiar regard for His body. One of them anointed His feet and never ceased to kiss them. The Lord says of her, “this woman since the time I came in hath not ceased to kiss my feet,” @Luke 7: 45. The Lord was watching, and appreciated that she did not cease this expression of love. No wonder Mary expended her box of ointment on His body, for the manifestation of God in holy manhood was there.
Referring to our Lord’s garments, the first reference to these literally, is the swaddling clothes, referred to by the angels who say to the shepherds, “Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger,” @Luke 2: 12. How many a time the Lord has drawn near to us in this way, appealing in this diminutive way to win our hearts, to attract us to Himself. How far away from God must be a human heart that is not moved in relation to that Babe in swaddling clothes! In @Luke 2 “The Babe” is come into this world clothed thus to dispel fear and to
{16}
capture the heart for God. The glad tidings are like that, the Lord coming through them so near to us as to win His way into even a child’s heart. Many are the garments in the wardrobe, of course, but how attractive these are to the youngest heart! There are times when He would present Himself thus clothed, figuratively, of course, to bring before us His own lowliness and attractiveness, what He was as wholly dependent here upon God, so that we might be affected. As our hearts are turned away from human greatness, the Lord becomes attractive to us in that light as “the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes.”
I would refer to what is represented in Joseph’s coat. It was taken away from him by those who hated him without a cause. As they brought it to their father they said, “discern now whether it is thy son’s vest or not,” @Genesis 37: 32, but that coat remained, for Jacob would never destroy it. It belonged to the wardrobe. “Israel loved Joseph more than all his sons.” He was a peculiar object of the love of Jacob, not that Jacob did not love his other sons, for no true father would do otherwise. But then Joseph was different, Joseph was unique, he was loved peculiarly, and, because of this love, Jacob made him the coat of many colours. How Jacob would delight to see him wear it, expressing in all these colours the excellences which Jacob had discerned there, so that they should be seen -- that is the
{17}
idea of a coat, the idea of garments, that things should be seen.
All this speaks of the Lord Jesus, as peculiarly loved here in manhood. He was arrayed here in this coat of many colours. Think of some of them, dear brethren. Who could look on such a coat without seeing what suggests the blue, the expression of what is heavenly? Who could fail to see the purple, for indeed he was born King; kingly features were inherent in Him and were constantly expressed? Who could fail to see the scarlet -- one who could not be hid? It says, “Jesus hid himself,” @John 8: 59; but really He could not be hid, certainly not from the eyes of heaven, from the eyes of God. Emerald also, the ever present expression of what is living. Nothing stale, nothing stereotyped, ever came from the lips of Jesus, no mere formal work was ever done by Him. Emerald was there in the coat. The colour of glowing brass was there, that is a colour in Scripture -- glowing brass, or amber, the evidence of holiness according to God.
The Lord Jesus was here for the thirty years marked by these characteristics. He was the delight of God who said, “Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight,” @Mark 1: 11. “I have found,” God says; He not only raised up His Son Jesus, but He sent Him to bless us. Jacob says to Joseph, “come, and I will send thee.” The apostle says, “God, having raised up his Son
{18}
Jesus, sent him to bless you,” @Acts 3: 26. He was sent wearing this coat. Joseph came seeking his brethren, came into the field arrayed in this coat, and they took it from him, stained it with blood, and sent it back to Jacob. The Lord would appeal to us by the suggestions conveyed in this coat in order to give us an impression of the peculiar place He has in the love of the Father. Some saw this, and said, “we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father,” @John 1: 14; that is like the coat of Joseph. John says, “we have contemplated his glory.” The Lord comes to us at times to give us an impression like that so that it might have its effect upon us. He is consciously recognised by us as the First-born One, for the birth-right was Joseph’s -- the first-born among many, loved in a unique way, as the coat indicates.
There are many other features we might speak of. Mark speaks of the Lord’s garments on the holy mount, more than any other writer. It says, “his garments became shining, exceeding white as snow, such as fuller on earth could not whiten them.” The Lord is seen there arrayed in this garb, the heavenly purity of His vesture being emphasised, a purity, dear brethren, that is entirely unknown on earth. There is no fuller on earth capable of producing such whiteness as is seen in the garments of Jesus on the mount. How the Lord loves at times to come thus to us,
{19}
that we should see Him in the spotless purity that marked every motive, every action, and every word. How unclean are the cleanest of garments in this world. The prophet says, “all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags,” @Isaiah 64: 6. When looked at in the sight of heaven they are such, but the garments of Jesus are exceedingly white as snow, and shining. Luke says white and glistening, radiating the pure light of heaven. Thus the Lord would present Himself to us; thus helping us to judge the uncleanness that is natural to us, and that marks everything in the world.
There is another robe that He has worn: the robe of derision, of mockery, of scorn, of contempt, that was put upon Him by men. They put on Him a purple robe, but they did it in mockery, derision, and hatred. Sometimes the Lord has to call our attention to that when we would make friends with the world, when we begin to think highly of the wisdom of this world that comes to naught. When we tend to association with this world for gain, friendships with the world, the Lord may have to remind us of this robe and of the place He has in this world as despised and rejected. Saul of Tarsus said, “Who art thou, Lord?” and He says, “I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest.” Not I *was*, but I *am*, @Acts 22: 8. Some of us think He was that, but He says, I *am* despised and scorned and hated
{20}
here. In a spiritual sense Paul presented that robe at Corinth and in Galatia. He said, “O, senseless Galatians -- who has bewitched you; to whom, as before your very eyes, Jesus Christ has been portrayed, crucified?” @Galatians 3: 1. He presented Christ to both the Corinthians and Galatians in relation to the terrible scorn, hatred, and contempt of this world. How often the Lord has to remind us of that robe spiritually, dear brethren, we must admit.
He would love to appear in other garments, but again and again He must remind us, by the prophetic word, of the meaning of the cross. The epistle to the Hebrews tells us that a time would come when some would crucify afresh the Son of God, and tread Him under foot. Christendom will do this, and indeed it has begun. It is the terrible expression -- re-enacting the whole thing spiritually, so that the purple robe still has its own meaning.
We also have the grave-clothes, not, of course, that the Lord ever wears them again in a literal sense. As Peter and John look into the sepulchre, they are there. They are laid aside, they have served their purpose, and the napkin is folded up. Joseph of Arimathaea brought clean linen, not a trace of defilement on the linen, corresponding to the purity of the manhood of Christ. The clothes that were there in the sepulchre spoke of the fact that He had been buried. Oh,
{21}
how often He has to tell us that He has been buried, when what should be buried about us is not buried. In our lives, in our relations with one another, in the gatherings of the saints, often there is that which should be buried, that which is unfit to be seen. That is the idea of burial. Abraham loved Sarah. No one would question that, but he says, “that I may bury my dead out of my sight,” @Genesis 23: 4. He could not bear to see his dead remain unburied. The apostle at Corinth preached that Christ was buried; in that sense he presented, spiritually, these grave-clothes.
Are we going to perpetuate the existence in ourselves of what is corrupt and loathsome? As the Lord speaks to us about His having been buried, it is that we might put out of sight for ever that which in us is unfit to be seen. His burial was vicarious as much as His death, and was to remove from under the eye of God and from us, as judged in the same way, what should never again be seen, what no one would like to see. Martha indicates that when the Lord proposes to raise Lazarus. “By this time he stinketh,” she says, @John 11: 39. That was right as far as it went; what is buried we never want to see again, so the Lord reminds us of His vicarious burial.
Just a word or two more, although there are many other garments. We read of a mighty angel in @Revelation 10 who came down from heaven, clothed
{22}
with a cloud, with a face like the sun. He put one foot on the earth and the other foot on the sea, and took possession of everything, crying with aloud voice as a lion; a reference undoubtedly to Christ, and speaking in this sense, under the figure of a cloud, of one of the garments in which He appears. The cloud is the symbol in Scripture of the divine presence, the glory of God being behind it, but there in such a way that it is evident there is more than we can see. The cloud denotes there is something unseen, something more than appears to the eye. We can see the cloud, and we can worship as we see it, but it also tells us that there is more there than we can see. Because certain leaders in christendom cannot see behind the cloud, they say there is nothing behind it, and they give up the truth of the deity of Christ. Those who love Him gladly accept the inscrutable character of the Person of Christ, that besides all we may know and delight in, there is always something further. Indeed we are told that “no one knows who the Son is but the Father,” @Luke 10: 22, and that, He has a name written which no one knows. Clothed in a cloud, thus brings in the divine presence with all its blessedness, or, maybe, with its warning, but we recognise that there is more than we can compass.
In @Revelation 19 we have another reference to the Lord’s garments. There are other garments in this closing book. The swaddling clothes of
{23}
Luke suggest the beginning, but there are many others that follow. In @Revelation 19 we have this word that He is clothed in a vesture dipped in blood. Again, I am not referring to what it bears on primarily, but in a general way. The Lord appears in this vesture bearing upon it the evidence of death; it is vengeance, no doubt, corresponding with what Isaiah speaks about, “dyed garments,” as having trodden the winepress; but the Lord chooses at times to draw near to us with the token on His vesture of His death, with the reminder, in the garb in which He draws near, that He has died, and that evil comes under His judgment. Would we have it otherwise?
You will remember the bird that was let loose in the open field. One loves to think of that bird being liberated to go where it would without restraint. Such is the Lord, the heavenly One, He is gone where He would, and Peter says He is gone into heaven. It is His own act, in that way, He has gone there, but this living bird was dipped in the blood of the slain bird, the stain of death was upon the living bird as it went into the open field. I am sure the Lord loves to draw near to us in this sense, so that we should never lose sight of the fact that He has died. He has been into judgment, He has been into death; He is seen thus in @Revelation 5 as a Lamb “as slain,” not exactly something past, something historical; the death of Christ is never mere history. The
{24}
Lamb is seen in the midst of the throne as slain. Every part of the universe awakens in praise as the Lord appears as it were in a garment indicating death. Also on His vesture and on His thigh He has a name written, King of kings and Lord of lords. On His vesture He has this name written. It does not tell us what the vesture is made of, but it tells us what is written on it, it is permanently there.
That is a word for the care meetings, for He would come in there with this name written on His vesture, King of kings and Lord of lords. If anyone is to rule rightly, he must be controlled by the King of kings, and if to administer rightly, he must be under the administration of the Lord of lords. How differently we would behave if we were conscious of the Lord being in this garb, and He is spiritually; He comes in, so to speak, in this way, with this name on His vesture. There would be a different story to tell at times if we were conscious that the King of kings and Lord of lords was with us with this name on His vesture. He would disclose Himself to our hearts in this way. All rule and administration is centred in the One who has this garment on which there is the name written. It is a permanent matter, it is never erased, for He will never resign, He will never give up His kingship or His lordship while it is needed -- He will never abdicate, like the kings of this world. The Name is written on His vesture.
{25}
King of kings and Lord of lords. One suggests these thoughts with the hope that we might see the immensity of what is available. I am sure we have scarcely realised the variety of the characteristics in which the Lord would draw near.
May the Lord help us, and, as the apostle said to the Corinthians, the Spirit would say to us, “be ye also enlarged,” @2 Corinthians 6: 13.
{26}
RESPONSE TO GOD IN DAYS OF APOSTASY
Epistle of Jude
I am confident, beloved brethren, that we can be assured that the end of the present dispensation will not be inferior, in a spiritual sense, to the beginning. It is evident that the beginning and the end of what is of God always correspond. He Himself is said to be the “beginning and the end,” @Revelation 21: 6, a thought that could not, of course, allow for any deterioration. The Lord Jesus says, of Himself, “*I* am ... the beginning and the end,” and He is “the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come.” The work of God always secures a blessed end. The work of the Spirit of God here in the saints will have a magnificent end spiritually; though the day be dark publicly, yet the closing period is going to be wonderful according to God.
We see that in Jacob, who I believe is a figure of the work of the Spirit. He stands as representative of the work of the Spirit of God, and it says of him, “By faith Jacob when dying blessed each of the sons of Joseph, and worshipped,” @Hebrews 11: 21. Can we conceive a more wonderful setting to the life of Jacob, for when he was dying he was intelligent as to the man that should be first. He acted wittingly; he put the second man Ephraim before Manasseh,
{27}
deliberately. One of the great ends of the work of the Spirit in our hearts is to secure that the second Man who is out of heaven should be first. It says, “He takes away the first that he may establish the second.” That is God’s way, and Jacob reached it. Then it says that he worshipped. Think of a man such as Jacob had been, when dying, worshipping. I believe that the closing period of the assembly’s history is to be marked increasingly by worship, and I had that in my heart to speak about.
How beautifully the Lord Jesus illustrates what we have been saying. The beginning of His pathway here was marked by the acclamation of the heavenly hosts, praising God and saying, “Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men,” @Luke 2: 14. Then, in the closing scene ere He vanished out of their sight, it is said that they worshipped Him. His coming in was marked by the acclamation of the heavenly host; His going out was marked by the worship of His own. So that seems to me to be in keeping with what God does. How frequently we find in the precious Scriptures, that at the end of a section or a book, we are brought to a doxology. Think of the books of the Psalms -- each one of them closes with worship. Whatever may have been the experiences, many inexpressibly painful, each closes with a doxology in which, on one occasion at least, the Psalmist calls on all the people of God to say, Amen: “let all the people say, Amen!” @Psalm 106: 48. The Spirit of God is active to bring us consciously into that Amen. Even the closing scene of Nebuchadnezzar’s life is like that. What a man he had been, but how wondrous the end; he disappears
{28}
from view as a worshipper. He says, “Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the King of the heavens, all whose works are truth, and his paths judgment: and those that walk in pride he is able to abase,” @Daniel 4: 37. Thus he disappears; that is his end. I cannot refer to many doxologies in detail; for there are many of them, but as taken account of intelligently they give substance to our worship; they increase the volume of worship from the hearts of the saints. The great book that illustrates this is Romans, and the apostle touches theme after theme, evidently with one thing in his heart -- to bring before the saints in Rome that which will make them worshippers.
Paul speaks of the Creator, so infinitely great, and there is a doxology which is not simply a statement of what is true, but is the worship of Paul’s own heart. He says, “who is blessed for ever. Amen,” @Romans 1: 25. Let us be in that Amen always; let our hearts never be silent as to the blessedness and greatness of God, the Creator. Then, when He speaks of the Lord Jesus Christ personally, “come of David’s seed according to flesh,” there rises in the apostle’s soul a vision of the inexpressible greatness of Christ, as to who He is, and he says, “who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen,” @Romans 9: 5. What a theme to awaken the worship of our hearts: “Jesus Christ ... come of David’s seed according to flesh” -- not only that He was, but that He is over all, God. Though in glorious manhood, it says that He is over all, that is, over the whole universe, not confined in any way to one section, but over all; that blessed One whom we know in manhood is “over all, God
{29}
blessed for ever. Amen.” We are to have part in that Amen; God is helping the saints to say it. Then he thinks of the wisdom of God in His ways, and he says, “O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable his judgments, and untraceable his ways! For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counsellor? or who has first given to him, and it shall be rendered to him? For of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory for ever. Amen,” @Romans 11: 33 - 36. Finally, there appears before the apostle’s heart a glimpse of the assembly, the mystery up to which he is leading. He is preparing the Roman saints for God for His service, and, as nearing his end, he says, “Now to him that is able to establish you, according to my glad tidings and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, as to which silence has been kept in the times of the ages, but which has now been made manifest, and by prophetic scriptures, according to commandment of the eternal God, made known for obedience of faith to all the nations -- the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever. Amen,” @Romans 16: 25 - 27. Thus he closes his epistle, as many another is closed, with a doxology -- so in keeping with the way of God.
I want to touch a little now on this profoundly encouraging epistle of Jude. It was specially written for our day. The greater part of the epistle presents an awful picture, yea, more than a picture, a reality plainly evident before the eyes of anyone who can see according to God. He fain would have spoken of Christ personally, or as he said, written of “our common
{30}
salvation,” but conditions were already developing that caused him to write otherwise. He saw men already creeping unawares into that which bore the name of Christ, ungodly men who deny our only Master and Lord Jesus Christ. Alas! we are surrounded by these ungodly men in Christendom, men who in no way express anything of God. He speaks of them as filthy dreamers, men whose minds are entirely out of control, who bring in the imaginations of their unclean minds, thus defiling everything they touch. He says, “they have gone in the way of Cain,” he saw the way of Cain reappearing. We need to remember, that evil never dies out of itself; if it disappears, it disappears as judged, by God or by the saints, but it never dies out of itself. The way of Cain goes right back to the beginning, but Jude says, There it is -- the refusal of the sacrificial work of Christ as the basis of approach to God. Is it not widespread at this moment? He says, too, that they have “given themselves up to the error of Balsam”; they are speaking of what is of God, but for reward; and they have “perished in the gainsaying of Core.” He saw already the rebellious uprising against Christ as the great Priest; the usurpation of the place of Christ in the church had already begun; Jude saw it and felt it. He speaks of them as “wandering stars,” men who are no longer -- if ever they were -- under the control of Christ; they have broken away even from outward control.
Then he also refers to Sodom and Gomorrah. He saw the features of Sodom reappearing, the spiritual Sodom, as well as the carnal one -- both evident even in Jude’s day. The scripture speaks of a place that
{31}
is “spiritually Sodom,” @Revelation 11: 8. Think of the awful spiritual corruption that has developed! Then he tells us something that is terribly true of men and women today, that even in that which they know naturally, they corrupt themselves. He saw that beginning in his day. How blatant it is in the world around us -- in the religious world, in christendom today! Scripture says that nature teaches the distinction in appearance between a man and a woman in christendom that is being given up. Nature teaches that it is a glory to a woman to have long hair, but in what nature teaches they corrupt themselves. Nature teaches what is true beauty in a woman, but how dreadful is the condition that has developed in the abandonment of what even nature teaches -- and that in christendom!
I must not refer more to that side, but how dark it is! It is the setting in which Jude closes his epistle, the darkness of Egypt coming into the professing church. But then he says, “But ye, beloved, ... “ Thank God for the difference, in contrast to what he has been presenting. Let every one of us, the dear young brothers and sisters and children stand by that “But.” Never allow the distance between the world -- be it the religious world or the social world -- and what is proper to the believer to be reduced by a hair’s breadth. “But ye, beloved, ... “ Jude saw living affections operating in the hearts of the saints; what a blessed, holy thing, recovered and maintained in the face of the darkness and the hatred that abounds! “But ye, beloved, building yourselves up ... “ How blessed is the development of what is mutual; the self building up of the body in
{32}
love, what is provided by each member contributing a living part. Think of a local gathering, say of fifty saints, brothers and sisters, old and young, every one contributing a living part! Jude says, That is still here: “building yourselves up on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit” -- holy desires operating in the heart and expressed in prayer -- “keep yourselves in the love of God.”
Then, finally, he begins a note of worship; he closes this solemn epistle with worship. The dark scene that he has portrayed has not removed from his heart what God is maintaining to the end; that which is precious to Him and responsive to Him; that indeed, which considers for Him and His desires. Think of God having desires! Think of our holy privilege in responding to them! As to Himself, as Paul says, God is not “served by men’s hands as needing something,” @Acts 17: 25. There is a sense, of course, in which He is wholly sufficient in Himself; it must be so, and yet He has desires. What does He desire? “Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.” He desires worship, and He desires worshippers. You cannot separate the worshippers from the worship according to God. That is what is attempted, alas! Much is made of formal worship in christendom, the music, the mere words, the vestments -- all these things have a great place as part of the worship that men have established. But what God is seeking, and what He would measure is not the worship but the worshippers. Let us put His standard alongside the worshippers, and what have we?
Jude in closing his epistle with a doxology says,
{33}
“But to him that is able to keep you without stumbling,” who is able to see the saints through, whatever may be without. He is able to do it, Jude says, and he worships Him as the One who is able to do it, “and to set you with exultation blameless before his glory.” Jude has in his heart the inheritance that God has in the saints, that He is going to present them to Himself before the presence of His glory with exceeding joy. Then he says, “to the only God ... “ Whatever may be the position outside, this is to be maintained -- “to the only God.” There is not an idol in the hearts of the saints in this closing doxology. That is what Jude has in mind, and then he gives expression to one of the most wonderful utterances from a human heart in Scripture. He says, “to him ... be glory, majesty, might, and authority, from before the whole age, and now, and to all the ages. Amen.” Think of such thoughts, beloved. Jude has looked at the awful features of that which bore the name of Christ, but this is what is in his heart.
He says, “to him ..: be glory ... from before the whole age.” You might ask Jude what he knew of what was “before the whole age.” How did he come to have an apprehension of God in that relation, that he could worship Him in regard to it? He says, “to him ... be glory”; that is, there is present in Jude’s soul a sense of worship to God in relation to what was from “before the whole age.” Think of the vastness of such a thought in his heart! It refers to his apprehension of God as beyond the period of time. He thought of God in that way, as the One that inhabited eternity, before time existed! The sense of the greatness of God thus in the soul of Jude
{34}
leads him to worship the “eternal God.” How little we know or are able to say as to that, but we know that unapproachable light was there, that love was there, and glory was there, before the world was. As Jude thought thus of God in all His inscrutable greatness, he says, “to him ... be glory ... from before the whole age.”
Then I am sure that Jude had attended to the words of the apostles. He speaks of “the words spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ”; he adhered to them, and his soul was filled with worship in relation to what was purposed from “before the whole age,” the eternal thoughts and purposes of God before time, before the world, in relation to us. That also would fill his soul. One cannot speak much of it, but Peter touches one theme. He says, “knowing that ye have been redeemed, not by corruptible things, as silver or gold, ... but by precious blood, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot, the blood of Christ, foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world,” @1 Peter 1: 18 - 20. Peter lays hold of that, and I have no doubt Jude had it in his heart, that the One through whom we are redeemed and the means of our redemption, was in the mind of God as foreknown before the foundation of the world. The natural mind would inquire why God should permit a condition of things that would need redemption, but it is not permissible for the thing formed to question what is done by the One who formed it; for the clay to question the Potter. It says of the One who is the Redeemer that He was “foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world.” I am sure Jude would have that in his heart
{35}
when he says, “to him ... be glory ... from before the whole age.”
The apostle Paul speaks of “the hope of eternal life, which God, who cannot lie, promised before the ages of time,” @Titus 1: 2. He has in his soul the maintenance of life according to the promise of God before time was. How wonderful that is! The question of good and evil, which belongs to time, appears so great to us that even before sin came in, Eve speaks of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil as being in the midst of the garden, whereas the Spirit of God says, “the tree of life, in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil,” @Genesis 2: 9. It was evidently near, but it does not actually say that the tree of the knowledge of good and evil was in the midst, but it does say that the tree of life was in the midst. Thus the central thought of God was that there would be one blessed Man, for trees in Scripture refer to men, who would support the character of life that was according to the eternal thoughts of God. The apostle Paul, in writing to the Ephesians, says, “according as he has chosen us in him before the world’s foundation, that we should be holy and blameless before him in love,” chapter 1: 4 -- a thing that is wonderful to our hearts -- He chose us before time was to be before Him as taken into favour in the Beloved, marking us out beforehand for sonship according to the good pleasure of His will. Jude would have all that in mind, as heeding the words of the apostles, and as he looked over that vast range before the ages of time, he says, “to him ... through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory.” The great and
{36}
blessed Person who secures worship from the hearts of men is Jesus Christ our Lord.
Then he says, “and now.” What a vista would open up before Jude’s soul as he thinks of “now,” what there is now that would provide substance to the worship of Jude’s soul. What is there now? What we are in the light of now, is the revelation of God. Could there be anything more blessed and glorious with which to fill our hearts? “No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him,” @John 1: 18. That is part of what is now, and the blessedness of it was in Jude’s heart as he uttered this doxology. How much is in the “now”! The apostle John says, “And we know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding that we should know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life,” @1 John 5: 20. What is also “now” is this, the Spirit of God has come, He is here in the believer, and in the assembly. “Do ye not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you?” @1 Corinthians 6: 19. “Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?” @1 Corinthians 3: 16. He is here also as the Comforter to attend to the interests of Christ, to form us according to those purposes before time, and to fit us for Christ’s day. All this is part of the “now.” And the assembly of God is here; the true tabernacle has been pitched, and the service of God is going on. Jude has thus in his heart, and more, when he says, “to him ... be glory ... now.” What a wondrous day we are in.
{37}
beloved! -- the closing day. Some sense of the greatness of God in relation to what was before time has come into the hearts of the saints, and some sense of the wonder of the “now” is with us, so that we worship.
Then Jude looks forward, and he says, “and to all the ages.” He looks right into eternity, and sees such a scene that he worships. He looks into the coming age, the “administration of the fulness of times,” and he sees everything in heaven under the headship of Christ, angels and authorities and powers, the assembly, every family in heaven -- all under the influence and direction and impulse of Christ. He also sees everything on earth headed up in Christ -- and how our hearts long for it -- not a movement on earth in the coming age but is effected by Christ. He looks further; as Peter says, “we wait for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness,” @2 Peter 3: 13. By the Spirit Jude looks into eternity, the ages of ages, and what does he see? A new heaven, with families in it, all in the blessed consciousness, in various degrees, of sonship, being named of the Father, all enjoying what is heavenly, and held there in the power of love to all eternity. Think of being brought to the altitude of the divine thought, that we should be heavenly! “Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones,” @1 Corinthians 15: 48. Think of having a place in what is heavenly and, indeed, in the new heaven, and never a possibility of falling or of leaving it. Then also a new earth, inhabited. Scripture speaks of the “habitable part of his earth,” @Proverbs 8: 31. How little, alas! there is that is habitable today. Think
{38}
of the whole earth -- what is there habitable according to God? But Jude had before his mind a new earth, every part of which would be habitable, and every part conscious that there are exalted spheres above them, yet eternally content to be where God has put them. Never will the word be heard, “I will ascend”; never will the heavenly fall; never will the earthly attempt to mount up, but all knowing God, will be eternally satisfied to be where He has set them.
The Scripture says, “Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he shall tabernacle with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, their God. And he shall wipe away every tear from their eyes; and death shall not exist any more, nor grief, nor cry, nor distress shall exist any more, for the former things have passed away,” @Revelation 21: 3, 4. As Jude looks into the ages of ages, his soul is filled with worship, and he utters at the close of this solemn and deeply affecting epistle this wondrous doxology: “to him ... through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory.” One loves to think of how we shall ever hold all as having come by Jesus Christ, the great and glorious instrument for the securing of the thoughts of God. “To us there is ... one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him,” @1 Corinthians 8: 6. How He will stand out thus for ever!
Thus Jude closes, “But to him ... the only God our Saviour, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory” -- a vista that bows our hearts in worship; though little indeed can we view the immensity of it! -- “from before the whole age, and now” -- thank God for the “now” -- “and to all the ages.” Then he
{39}
says, “Amen.” The Psalmist would speak to us there; he would say, “let all the people say, Amen!” Let every heart come into this. Dear brethren, the end is at hand, and the only thing that counts now is to come into this “Amen,” to come into thus response to God, known in this wondrous way, even in the presence of the day of apostasy and darkness that is spreading over Christendom. The one thing that really matters is that our hearts should be secured for this “Amen,” to have part in this blessed closing doxology. May the Lord deepen it. I am sure He has it, but may it increase and deepen in volume and intensity in all our souls. One loves to think of the extent of the ultimate doxology that will be heard. John says that he heard it. “And every creature which is in the heaven and upon the earth and under the earth, and those that are upon the sea, and all things in them, heard I saying, To him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb, blessing, and honour, and glory, and might, to the ages of ages,” @Revelation 5: 13. One is conscious of the intense feebleness of one’s own part in these great things, but I am assured that they are being secured; and the great thing for us all is to set our hearts more earnestly and definitely to have a part in them to the end.
{40}
“WHAT GOD HAS JOINED TOGETHER”
@Acts 2: 36; @Ephesians 4: 8 - 14; @1 Peter 2: 25
I trust, beloved brethren, that what one would bring before us at this time may strengthen what has already been said as to the continuity of the work of God from generation to generation. I would speak a little of several thoughts that the Spirit of God has connected so that they truly may be together in our hearts and minds and exercises. For what God has joined together, let not man separate.
The first passage read connects together our blessed Lord’s position on high as Lord and Christ; the second scripture connects shepherds and teachers, and the third, shepherd and overseer. These great activities prosper as we hold them together. As we are truly subject to our only Lord; the One who has been made Lord; the One who is entitled to the bowing of every knee in heaven and on earth and under the earth; as our Lord is truly our Lord we get the gain of what He is as Christ. How much there is for us all to consciously enter into in relation to Christ! Think of what He is as the anointed Man to whom God has entrusted everything! Think of His ability to direct and influence every man, for the word is: “Christ is the head of every man.” Think of every man on the earth! There is sufficient influence and wisdom and power to direct, in Christ, for Him to be head to *every* man. But who are they who get the benefit of this? Those who truly accept His lordship. Then, too, He is Head of the assembly, He is “Head over all things to the assembly, which is his body.” He is capable of directing and influencing her entirely for the pleasure of God. But, beloved brethren, how many of our dear fellow Christians miss it? It is because they do not truly submit to His authority. In the coming world,
{41}
before everything in heaven and on earth is headed up in Christ, every knee is to bow! He is going to reign and His reign prepares for His headship. I submit that to us all and especially to the beloved young ones, for whom we thank God, with the possibilities that are available to them, that we can have the profound blessedness of Christ known in headship if we maintain the fact of His lordship. So that in that sense Lord and Christ are inseparable. That is the divine order -- Lord and Christ. The Lord said, in @John 13, “I therefore, the Lord and the Teacher ... .” We will never be taught by the blessed Teacher to whom each one of us may say, Rabboni, unless first of all, He is Lord to us. In that passage He said, “Ye call me the Teacher and the Lord,” but then He reversed it. He said, “If I therefore, the Lord and the Teacher ... .” And so, beloved brethren, we are taught by the blessed Lord, and by those who are qualified to teach, as first of all, we maintain in our souls the principle of subjection to the Lord.
I have been impressed with the thought of the gifts with which the Lord has endowed the assembly from that place outside of all limitations. He has “ascended up above all the heavens,” where limitations are unknown which, in grace, He accepted here. But He is not limited now. He was never limited, inherently, but He accepted limitations as He said, “How am I straitened.” But now He is in a place of unlimited power where no restrictions can ever be imposed in any way. He has ascended up above all the heavens, and from that exalted place He has endowed the assembly, as it says, “some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers.” I desire, beloved brethren, that we should all lay hold of the wonderful combination and order of shepherds and teachers combined in the one gift and service. The teaching
{42}
is abundantly more effective when it is related to the activities and affections of a shepherd. Our blessed Teacher, the Lord Jesus, unites perfectly the features of the shepherd and the teacher. And what an example of a shepherd and teacher the apostle Paul was! And so with Peter! And we all can say truly of the honoured servant whom the Lord has just claimed, that over the long years of his service he blended these two features -- shepherd and teacher. Hence the effectiveness of the teaching combined with self-sacrifice and care and tender affection for the sheep. As one thinks of what lies ahead of our young men, available to be endowed and maybe already endowed to teach, one would say, with the tenderest affection, that the power to teach and the effectiveness of the teaching will largely be governed by their hearts being secured as shepherds. Thus we have the combination of shepherds and teachers.
The apostle Peter has also united two thoughts -- shepherd and overseer. Christ, personally, stands out supremely in the oversight of souls. Think of His oversight over the soul of Peter! It was exercised with all the feelings of a shepherd. This is not a gift, but a service to be rendered. How much it is needed! Oversight -- watching over and caring for the spiritual welfare of the saints. It is needed everywhere, but it is needed, beloved brethren, combined with the feelings, affections, longings and activities of shepherds. According to the apostle’s word it is right to desire to exercise oversight, but the oversight will be abundantly more effective when rendered along with the tender self-sacrificing service of the shepherd. It is “the shepherd and overseer of your souls.” One thinks of the cares of the gatherings of the saints; the individual care; the care that is needed in a place like this and places elsewhere -- and what is needed is persons who combine the features of the shepherd with the service of
{43}
oversight. The Lord will bless such oversight, and He does bless it.
Well, I had these thoughts in mind as connecting with the way things are continued -- continued by the maintenance in each of our hearts of the authority of the Lord, thus making room for His blessed headship; continued in the service of teaching blended with the feeling service of the shepherd, and in the effective oversight of those who exercise it as deriving from Christ the blessed features of the shepherd.
{44}
THE MARYS
@John 19: 25 - 27; @Acts 1: 12 - 14
I was much impressed with the comment of the Spirit of God in regard to Mary of Bethany. “It was *that* Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair”. It was *that* Mary. The Spirit of God says this to distinguish *that* Mary from all other Marys. I believe in that way the Lord designates the peculiar feature of *that* Mary. She had learned what bitterness was, for Mary, as we know, means “bitter”. Naomi says, coming back from the land of Moab, a widow and bereft of her sons, “Call me not Naomi, call me Mara (or Mary) for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me”. She had tasted the bitterness of death, and she says, “Call me Mara”.
Now it is remarkable how the Spirit of God has gathered together in the gospels, particularly in the gospel of John, these Marys. They are all found there, showing, I believe, that they had a history in connection with what was bitter to the flesh. They had learned in sorrow and
{45}
bitterness, that which fitted them for the place they were going to have in the mind of God. So that Mary of Bethany had learned to set aside all that would distinguish herself. “It was *that* Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair”. She had learned the worthlessness of human glory, she had learned, dear brethren, that there was only one blessed Person to be dignified, so she takes what she might have adorned herself with -- the ointment of spikenard very costly, and her hair which was *her* glory, and she bestows them upon Christ. She had learned in sorrow, that human glory is worthless. It is not an easy lesson. It is a lesson of intense bitterness to the natural heart. See how Jacob had to learn it. When Reuben was born his heart was held by the possibilities of Reuben his firstborn; he says, “Reuben thou art my firstborn ... the excellency of dignity and the excellency of power”. Potentially Jacob saw in Reuben what was excellent, and the possibilities that lay in him, but in the bitterness of his heart he had to learn that he could not attach excellency to the first man; there *is* no excellence.
You say, I believe that, I read it in scripture; that is not what “Mary” means. “Mary” means that you have learned it through bitter lessons, you have learned -- that you cannot
{46}
attach excellency to the first man. Jacob had to learn that he could not put any trust in Reuben, however dignified, however outwardly excellent he may have found him; he says he is “unstable as water”. You cannot attach dignity to the first man. That is not to be only a doctrine that we believe in a formal way because it is in scripture. Mary learned in the bitterness of her own heart that there was no one worthy of dignity and glory but Christ, and she accepted that. She was *that* Mary. I would like to speak about the others.
It says “there stood by the cross of Jesus”; they *stood* there, “his mother, and his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Cleopas, and Mary Magdalene”. The Spirit of God has gathered these three Marys, and I want to speak of these as found at the cross, that the Lord might help us to see the deep lessons that they passed through, the bitter lessons to their hearts, in accordance with their names, which they learned there, so that as learning them they can rightly take their place in the upper room.
You see when you come to the upper room in the beginning of the Acts -- the spiritual sphere, the upper room is above the level of this world which is filled with human ideas, natural thoughts and human greatness -- there
{47}
is an upper room, there is a spot outwardly insignificant, a room, not a cathedral, not a palace, just a room, but it is above the level of the world, and these beloved women are there in the beginning of the Acts, they are there -- wonderful thing! But you say, Peter is there, yes, Peter is there; and John is there, but the women are there too. What does that mean? It means that the subjective side is there as well as the responsible. Not only are they there responsibly and publicly as a matter of light, as knowing what is right according to God, but they are there according to their inward state.
I believe that is what the Lord wants at the end, as He had at the beginning. He not only had Peter and James and John in the beginning, but He had the women also. That is to say, their inward state corresponded with their public position. The light they had, and their inward state, were in agreement. That is of the utmost importance at the present time. I believe the Lord would effect that in the hearts of His people, that we not only have the thing as light and know it as a guide and rule, but that we are there in the inward secret subjective condition of our hearts. This is going to cost us something. You want the Marys for that. So it says, “with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus”. “The women”
{48}
include these Marys undoubtedly, though only one of them is named.
Now I would just like to say what I believe would prepare those three Marys, through intense bitterness of soul exercise, for the wonderful position of the upper room. The first one was Mary the mother of Jesus. She *stood* there, not that she just came and went, but it says she stood there, contemplating that scene. I do not think we could ever tell what must have passed through her heart. She had a wonderful place in connection with the Lord, a place that none else has ever had. She knew something of the greatness of His person. The angel had said to her that she was highly favoured among women, that all generations would call her blessed, that the One that was to be born should be called Jesus, Saviour, One who could save. “Thou ... shalt call his name Jesus”. So great was He that He was Saviour not only for Israel, or for the Gentiles, but *the Saviour*. Then too, “He shall be great and shall be called the Son of the Highest”. What a name for Mary to hear, “the Son of the Highest”, come right from the very highest point in the universe, from the uncreated sphere. Think of a sphere that was never created, that is above the heavens. We sometimes forget that the heavens were created. God created the heavens. You think
{49}
of what is beyond the heavens, the uncreated sphere where God is, and this blessed One came from the highest. The angel went on to tell her, “that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God”.
You can understand the great thoughts that filled Mary’s heart as she thought of herself as linked up in a special and peculiar way with this blessed One, so that she was blessed among women. Yet, who can tell the bitterness of that moment to her heart, when she saw everything that she had hoped for, all the hopes that she had centred in Christ, herself as connected with them, being broken to pieces. The Lord had indicated a little of this to her beforehand, and indeed the Spirit of God had at the outset, little as she might have understood it. Simeon had said when he took the Lord as a child in his arms “a sword shall pierce through thine own soul also”. The Lord had sought to prepare Mary for that moment. At the age of twelve He had said to her “wist ye not that I must be about my Father’s business?” when she said, “why hast thou thus dealt with us?” He had indicated even at twelve years of age that there was other business than that of His mother and Joseph that compelled His attention. She understood not, but she kept these sayings in her heart and pondered them.
{50}
Then in the beginning of the gospel of John the Lord enlightens her further. At the wedding in Cana of Galilee she says to the Lord, “They have no wine”. The Lord says to her, “Woman what have I to do with thee”. He would convey to her that He had passed out of the sphere where she could control Him. She accepted it, she turns to the servants and says, “Whatsoever he saith unto you do”. She gets a ray of light there, that it is not a question of what she would say though she is the mother of Jesus. Mary gets the light that it is all important what *He* says, it is what *He* says, not what *I* say.
But now has come the moment at the cross when all that she had built on, and the peculiar place that she had in relation to the Lord, disappears for ever; she is now no longer to know Him as her son, she is now no longer to have a leading place as the mother of Jesus. The Lord ends that relationship and commits her to John; John is to be her son, and Mary is to be his mother. The relationship she has had to Him is over for all eternity. What a scene, what a lesson to Mary’s heart, to accept the setting aside of all claims and title in relation to what is natural, on the natural side. That fitted her for the upper room. She learned that lesson in the bitterness of her heart; she stood at the cross and saw it all there, and
{51}
she is afterwards found in the upper room. Wonderful! The Spirit of God names the Apostles, and then adds “the women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren”.
She is there, having left behind in the scene below all the rights and titles in respect of her link with Christ after the flesh; all glory, all title, all claim by her is dropped for ever. The fact that she was the mother of Jesus does not entitle her to preferential treatment in the upper room. She is just one of those who are there. She has learned at the cross the end of everything after the flesh. Like the Apostle who says, “Yea though we have known Christ after the flesh yet now henceforth know we him no more”. Mary had come to that, and that prepared her, it fitted her, to be in the upper room.
I wonder whether we have all learned that lesson and accepted it, that nothing in the natural sphere, nothing in the sphere of the flesh, gives us any standing in the upper room, nothing, not even if we had known Christ after the flesh. Mary the mother of Jesus stood at the cross, she saw and accepted the end of the choicest link after the flesh that anyone could ever know. Now we shall never be in the upper room rightly if we do not learn that lesson -- that what we have in a natural way
{52}
belonging to this scene, whether it be ability, whether it be that we have been entrusted with earthly resources, whether it be we have links in a natural way with what is of God through our parents or relationships, none of these things gives us one single right or standing in the upper room. We have no rights whatever because we are rich, or intelligent, or have a good understanding of things, a good deal of mental power, or that our relations have had a place in the testimony. None of that enters into the upper room, none of it; the cross is the end even of knowing Christ after the flesh, and you could not have a greater link than that. You come into the upper room in relation to the work of God in your soul.
What causes a good deal of difficulty amongst God’s people is that many think they ought to have preferential treatment because they have got certain links, such as father or mother, and they think that entitles them to special consideration. What we want to see is the work of God, for that is what counts. Mary the mother of Jesus is there as one who has stood at the cross and seen the end of everything after the flesh that was more precious to her heart than anything we can think of.
Now you come to another Mary -- Mary the
{53}
wife of Cleopas -- she stands there. I think the scripture would indicate to us what was going through her soul as she stood there. The Spirit of God tells us about Cleopas, and she is his wife. Cleopas speaks, and his wife would be in correspondence with him; she is the subjective side of what he says, and Cleopas tells us that they had wonderful hopes for the earth, wonderful hopes. They are walking along, you remember (@Luke 24: 18) (it does not say so, but no doubt it was Cleopas and his wife) and they are sad, and the Lord draws near to them and says, “What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another as ye walk and are sad?” and they said, “Thou ... hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days” and the Lord says, “What things?” and they say, “Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people”. They had wonderful hopes here for the earth, they were looking forward to a time of great joy and blessing on the earth, when Israel would have been redeemed from bondage and set free as a nation to serve God, and used to bow the nations under His great rule. But Mary the wife of Cleopas had stood by the cross, and she had seen every hope for the earth, all her hopes that she had built up in connection with earthly
{54}
things and earthly blessings, crushed for ever. “The chief priests and our rulers … crucified him”, and she witnessed it, and all their earthly hopes had gone. But when you see Mary the wife of Cleopas in the upper room she is there as having learned that lesson. Her portion is not on earth, she would not be in the upper room if her portion was on earth; her portion is in heaven now; she has seen Him go into heaven, and she belongs to a company that is heavenly, and her blessings now are heavenly and spiritual; she is not now looking for the redemption of Israel, but she is appreciating what is heavenly.
We have to know the meaning of “Mary” to reach that subjectively. Naturally every one of us build up our hopes on earth; we were made naturally for the earth, “As is the earthy, so also are they that are earthy”; and naturally we are all earthy, and all our objects and hopes and desires and prospects naturally belong to the earth. Mary the wife of Cleopas standing by the cross saw all this terminate. The cross terminated all hopes for the earth in Mary’s heart, and henceforth, having seen Jesus go into heaven, she is found in the upper room, her objects and hopes now heavenly, not earthly. I submit that it is bitter to the natural heart to really accept that our portion is not on earth. I believe the Lord is using
{55}
the present conditions of the world, and will continue to use them, to help us to accept the lesson of Mary the wife of Cleopas. How easily we are deceived and diverted, secretly building up our hopes on earth, but that is not in accord with the upper room. The portion of those in the upper room is not on earth, it is in heaven, and Mary is there as having learned the lesson that she no longer hopes for anything on the earth, but all is connected with a blessed Man in heaven.
Then it says that Mary Magdalene is there. Who call tell what went through that woman’s heart as she stood at the cross. Mary Magdalene -- what a name! The Lord thinks a very great deal of Mary Magdalene. When He rose from the dead He appeared first to her; you think of that! The blessed One who moves beyond the realm of death does not do things by accident, He appears to whom He will. It says He appeared first to Mary Magdalene, showing the distinctive place that she had in His heart as one He loved. She stood at the cross. What would be going through her soul? She was that woman out of whom He cast seven devils; she had come into touch with the Lord. She was quite a different case to Mary the mother of Jesus and had an entirely different history, and altogether different, too, to Mary the wife of Cleopas.
{56}
She was a woman who had been absolutely dominated by the power of darkness, the seven demons mean complete domination by the devil; think of a woman like that. She might have appeared respectable enough outwardly, but as a woman she represents what was secret, secretly governed by the power of evil in every part of her moral being; but she met the Lord, and He had cast out those demons. In one view of them they are cast out, in another they went out of her; with the might of His own blessed power He had caused them to go out, and He had taken possession of her heart; so much so, that ever after that she followed Him, and she ministered to Him of her substance. He exercised a dominating influence over her soul, He took the place of the seven demons. The seven demons had dominated that woman’s life, now the Lord dominates her, and she ministers to Him of her substance, and she followed Him everywhere. You find her often mentioned as following the Lord, and she followed right up to the cross. She followed Him, she had learned to love Him; He had become the object of her heart, and it says she stood at the cross of Jesus.
I think we can tell a little of what must have passed through her soul; there was the One who was her Lord, as she says, “*My* Lord”, “They have taken away *my* Lord”. Whatever
{57}
He was to anyone else, He was *her* Lord, her own Lord. He had delivered her from the power of darkness, He had captivated her heart; she stands by the cross of Jesus. She sees the princes of this world crucify the Lord of glory. She knows who He is, she knows He is the Lord of glory, the One who is supreme in power, but she witnesses the princes of the world, Pilate, Herod, the chief priests, the rulers, the soldiers, joining hands to crucify her Lord. What a bitter lesson to her heart! What an exposure to Mary of what this world is. The world stood exposed to Mary at that moment. She has finished with the world, she has no confidence in it whatever, she is not deceived as to its principles of lust and pride. The world is condemned in Mary Magdalene’s heart for ever. She would come up into the upper room in absolute refusal of every worldly principle; she would not allow one element of the world in the upper room; if it appears, she condemns it.
You can understand with what pleasure she followed the disciples in the selection of a man to take Judas’s place. She is one of “the women”, and they go over the question of who is to replace Judas; they want a man whose heart is right. They would carry Mary Magdalene with them when they prayed, “Thou Lord which knowest the hearts of all
{58}
men show whether of these two thou hast chosen”. You can understand how she would say Amen to that. She wants a heart that loves Christ and rejects the principle of gain; Judas loved the principle of gain, he was like Balaam, he loved the reward of unrighteousness, he loved money; Mary Magdalene would refuse that. You can understand that Mary Magdalene would concur when Ananias and Sapphira were cut off; they brought forward a worldly principle, seeking to get it in amongst God’s people to use what they had in a material way, not for the Lord’s interests to minister to Him, but to get a name for themselves. She would have been in accord with the judgment of that absolutely, because she stood at the cross of Jesus, and she has allowed her heart to learn this bitter lesson that they who are the friends of the world are the enemies of God; she would not bring into the upper room one worldly feature. Naturally we put confidence in the world; we build our hopes on this world’s system, but it is exposed at the cross; you cannot trust the world. The cross shows that the world is a vast system opposed to God, and it has crucified the Lord of glory, and not one worldly principle belongs to the upper room, not one.
Now you put these three Marys together and you will see the gain they would bring to that
{59}
upper room. One not claiming any rights because of links after the flesh, however great; that is Mary the mother of Jesus, she does not claim anything because she is the mother of Jesus, she has seen that that relationship is ended for ever. Then Mary the wife of Cleopas is there with a definite sense that all her hopes are in heaven, not on earth; she no longer looks for anything here, but her hopes, her blessings, lie in heaven where Jesus is. As the Apostle says, “have your mind on the things that are above”. And then Mary Magdalene is there as having accepted the absolute exposure of a world that crucified her Lord, so that she would not give place for a moment to one principle of the world.
These are some of the features in the upper room. Such secret conditions provide for the presence of the Spirit of God in power. The Spirit would produce them at the end as at the beginning, so that these features should be livingly and subjectively formed amongst God’s people. We have to admit that it is the “Marys” that contribute largely; it is they who learn the bitterness and reality of these things to the natural heart, and accept the bitterness; they do not want to alter their name, their name is “Mary”, that is, they have accepted the bitterness, the setting aside of the natural, the setting aside of the earthly,
{60}
and the exposure of the world; they have accepted that, and they are fitted to have their place in the upper room.
May the Lord help us all to travel on these lines, so that the upper room may become increasingly real to us.
