{#GOD'S NAME}
{1}
GOD'S NAME
@Exodus 3:13-15, @Exodus 6:1-8; @John 17:25-26; @Psalm 48:10
I have in mind to speak a little of the name of God, with a desire to draw our hearts away from our sorrows and our burdens and the wilderness around us, that we might afresh find God. Others, in days gone by, have been able to speak of Him as One who is to be found, and He is not far away from any one of us. He is a God at hand. Our lot is cast where He is near. God's people of old have been able to speak of Him in many ways. Moses, at the end of his days, as contemplating death, says: "Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations... from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God." Moses indicated that he had found a dwelling place for his heart in God.
The Psalmist also tells us that God is our refuge and strength; a very present help in the time of trouble. God is our refuge as well as our dwelling place. Indeed the Psalmist also speaks of God as his exceeding joy. He says, "God, my exceeding joy." Think of the knowledge of God that lies behind this statement. And, the apostle Paul goes further. He said, "For whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God; or are sober, it is for you." As he looked on the saints at Corinth he was sober indeed, but as he thought of God, as his heart withdrew from what sobered him in Corinth to what he knew of God, he says, If we are beside ourselves, it is to God.
I want to touch a little on the thought of God's
{2}
name. A word in Proverbs challenges us as to what we can tell. "Who hath ascended up into the heavens, and descended? Who hath gathered the wind in his fists? Who hath bound the waters in a mantle? Who hath established all the ends of the earth? What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou knowest?" @Proverbs 30: 4. What can we tell? I do not mean what scripture can we quote, but what do we *know* as having the conscious knowledge of God? For the knowledge of God's name measures our part in the great service of praise that the Lord died to establish, a great living system of praise to God. It is His great objective, like David's.
If you follow David's history you can see that the thing he was working towards in all his conflicts, in his suffering, in his rejection, in his power and glory, was to establish the great service of God in praise, as he says at the end, "The instruments which I made to praise therewith." The Lord Jesus takes that up (for David is but a figure of Christ), and He establishes fully the praise of God. "According to thy name," says the Psalm we read, "so is thy praise." It is according to the name that God has, as known to us in our hearts, so is His praise. Hence the extension of our knowledge of the name is not only gratifying to our own hearts and edifying, but is the basis of the contributions of all living praise. God only has the right to be praised; for a creature to seek it is sin.
God inhabits the praises of Israel. God is so blessed, so glorious, that the creature's blessing lies in the knowledge of Him and in His praise, and God finds
{3}
a habitation in the praises of His people. So I would say a word about His name, trusting the Lord would add a little to us, for we are all conscious, I am sure, of our small measure, yet He has much to unfold. His greatness is infinite; there is a boundless horizon before us, but as to our own receptivity, it is "here a little, and there a little." If God becomes a little greater to us, it will find its answer in greater praise in the assembly. The assembly is the vessel of praise that Christ is Head over, and, indeed, in which He sings. He, Himself, sings. Wonderful thought! The assembly is the instrument through which Christ sings the praise of God. "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises." Think of that coming from the lips of the One who was in agony; who groaned, who sighed, who wept, and who suffered. The praise of God is so blessed to the heart of Christ that He sings as He has a vessel through which to bring praise to God. He sings, showing the joy of His own heart in having the means of uttering the praise of God. Praise is founded on the knowledge of the name, for it says, "According to thy name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the earth."
One can only touch the subject simply and feebly, but I would touch a little on some of the names of God. First of all, I would like to refer to the name by which God is introduced to us in Scripture, namely, "God." Scripture opens with this, "In the beginning God." What a name that is! It conveys, no doubt, many great and infinite thoughts, but it designates the One who is absolute and supreme -- God! One who subsists outside of any relation to any thing or
{4}
any one. No creature could be that. Every creature has life relatively. It must be so. We can have no existence except as in relation to others, primarily to God. No creature is absolute and no creature is supreme. Whatever power a creature has, it is limited intensely, but GOD alone is supreme and absolute. He was, before there was anything, even before there were heavens. You will notice it says *heavens*, not only heaven, but before there were heavens, or earth, before there was a beginning, before there was time, God was. Oh, how beyond us! One who was from eternity, self-existent, and self-sufficient. Think of One self-sufficient from eternity, as Moses said, "from eternity to eternity thou art God." Nothing magnifies God more to the soul than to realise that He was self-sufficient from eternity, needing nothing, dependent on no one, but from eternity past, sufficient in Himself in those relationships of love and glory that existed in the Godhead. And "According to thy name, ...so is thy praise." God desires that some sense of this, in its infiniteness and inscrutability should come over our hearts, that we praise Him in the conscious sense that He is God, and would be God to us, supreme and absolute, so that we worship Him. One loves to hear the great men of old speaking of their God. "The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob." The One of whom David says, "My God"; the One of whom Daniel says, "My God"; the One of whom Paul says, "My God." God known and recognised in the secret of the soul as the One who is absolute and supreme, who calls thus for the praise and the worship of our hearts. Now, dear brethren, that lies
{5}
behind everything. God gives us desires that, what may be known of Him should be known by us. Scripture speaks of what may be known, and God wants us to know everything that can be known. There is that which is inscrutable; there is also that which may be known, and God proceeds to unfold His name in various ways so that the praise might extend, and widen till it fills the universe. God conveys to Abraham, through His servant Melchisedec, that He is the Most High God. He brings this name to him, "the Most High God, possessor of heaven and earth." Clearly that is relative. It is brought to Abraham in contrast to Chedorlaomer, the king of Elam, and his associates, dignitaries in this world; and also the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah with their possessions and with their elevations in this world. Melchizedek comes to Abraham with this name, "The Most High God." The One who is above every power in the universe, the Highest -- clearly relative. Never mind how high Chedorlaomer or the king of Sodom were; never mind how much their possessions; there is "The Most High God, possessor of heaven and earth." Abraham's soul receives this name, so that when he meets the king of Sodom, he says, "I have lift up my hand unto the Lord, the Most High God, possessor of heaven and earth." I have worshipped Him; this great name is known to me, for He is above all the authorities in the universe and He is the possessor of heaven and earth. I have lifted up my hand to Him. "I will not take from a thread even to a shoe latchet." "According to thy name... so is thy praise."
Then God discloses more to Abraham. He says,
{6}
"I am the Almighty God." That was when Abraham's body was as good as dead, and also Sarah's, as far as offspring was concerned; when death was on them both. God appeared to Abraham as Almighty, as One who could bring life out of death. How Abraham's heart laid hold of this! It was a treasure to him. He could say in his measure, we have this treasure in earthen vessels; we understand that God is not only Most High, but He is Almighty, so that death itself is no hindrance to God working, for He brings life out of death. Thus Abraham's faith is sustained, so that afterwards when Isaac is put on the altar, he counted that God was able to raise him from the dead. He counted on this name Almighty. According to this name, he will praise God. Even at the offering of Isaac there would be, coming from his heart, the praise that this name would bring forth, for Scripture says he counted that God was able to raise him from the dead. In his approach to that altar, he reckoned on the almightiness of God.
What comes out, is that the unfolding of God's name is cumulative. Each name carries forward what has already been known. No one who truly knew God would ever forget that He is absolute, supreme, inscrutable. That would stand behind all the names, yet He is known to us as the Most High and the possessor of heaven and earth, and He is also Almighty; He knows no limit to His power; death is no limit to it, so Almighty is He.
Then you come to Moses. He is going down into Egypt to be the deliverer of a thorny people. The thorn bush primarily has reference to them. God's appearance to him was in a *thorn* bush. If you
{7}
touch thorns you may get pricked, you may get hurt; the people they represent are not reliable, but God loves them. He has good will towards them. He is telling Moses as His servant, to go down and deliver them, and Moses says, If they ask me who sent me, what shall I say? What name will I tell them? In having to do with this thorny people, the evidence of sin manifest in them, yet the subjects of God's good will, what name will I tell them? And God says, "I AM THAT I AM." However much they may alter, however unfaithful they may be, tell them that "I AM THAT I AM," that I could not alter. That I AM commits Himself to them, and I cannot alter. However little the children of Israel understood it, Moses understood it. Once Moses had fully realised God's name in this connection, there was no more weakness with him. The irrevocable committal of God to His people, Himself unalterable, becomes the bulwark of Moses' heart, "I AM THAT I AM." Then God alters the word a little. He says, "say... I AM hath sent me unto you." Tell them that "I AM" -- such a One -- hath sent you. What a name for One who graciously comes near to us in our ruin and bondage and commits Himself to His people. I AM, the One who is not subject to time. Moses may go down and say that he had come to deliver them on behalf of God, but they might say to him, The days of our years are three-score and ten, and we soon fly away, and what about the position then? "Say... I AM hath sent me unto you." Moses will disappear, Aaron will die, Miriam will die. I AM will not die, and "I AM hath sent me unto you." The Eternal, the One whose name signifies
{8}
that He is outside the restrictions of time, "I AM." Carry these great thoughts forward, dear brethren, that the One who commits Himself thus to deliver His people is eternal, is the Almighty, is the Most High God, possessor of heaven and earth, is the Absolute, is supreme. How the praise would deepen and widen from the hearts of those who receive the name. "According to thy name... so is thy praise," and God's name gathers up from point to point what is disclosed at each stage.
In the sixth chapter it is again what He says to Moses to assure him. He tells Moses that He had already appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob as the Almighty, but that He did not make Himself known to them as Jehovah. The word Jehovah, of course, is used from the second of Genesis because that scripture was written long after the events recorded. It was written by Moses, who used the name by which he personally knew God. God says, "By my name Jehovah I was not made known to them." The fact that the word Jehovah is in the second of Genesis does not alter that, but now God says to Moses, I am Jehovah; this is My name, which I believe indicates that God is entering into covenant with His people; Himself, the Eternal, is making a covenant to bring His people out and be their God and they His people. That name settled Moses for the rest of his life, for God has made a covenant; the Absolute, the Supreme, the most High, the Almighty, the I AM, is now known as Jehovah and enters into a covenant with His people. Can He fail? Never. The name is a guarantee that God will carry out what He commits Himself
{9}
to; for, while He enters into a covenant, He is not subject to time, to limitations of power; to limitations of resources, for heaven and earth are His; He is absolute and supreme. When Moses gets that name, his fears are banished; he is assured in his heart. He acts and stands before Pharaoh as controlling the situation because of the Name.
Now to pass on to @John 17. I want to say a word as to how that name has extended, for it is cumulative, everything is carried forward, nothing is lost. God is now known to us under this wonderful designation, Father. John says, "It doth not yet appear what we shall be," yet, "now are we *children* of God." God is disclosed in grace to our hearth now as *Father* and unto us there is one God, *the Father*. The Thessalonians were the assembly of the Thessalonians in God *the* Father, which, in this setting, indicates that God has taken up the training, the discipline, the protection, the support of His children. Oh, what a name! Now are we the children of God. "I write," says John, "to you, little children, because ye have known the Father." They know God now disclosed in this wonderful position of grace and love, that He is the Father. Think of the One who is the Absolute, who is the Most High, who is the Almighty, the I AM, Jehovah who keeps covenant, now known to us as the Father; that we are the subjects of His love, care, protection, service, training, of the discipline which the Father sees is needed. Oh, what praise is due to Him on this line! Most scriptures that speak of the Father do so in this character, but what volume of praise in the various epistles you will find to Him who is God and Father. But
{10}
then in @John 17 the Lord speaks from a more exalted platform still. He says, "O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have known thee." Think of the knowledge the Son has of the Father. "I have known thee." How often the Lord speaks thus, "My Father." Even in Gethsemane, "O my Father." He begins His public life at twelve with these words, "wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" Think of the knowledge that lay in Jesus as Man when He said, "My Father," and when He said, "My God." And the Lord says, "O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me. And I have declared unto them thy name and will declare it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them." The Lord spoke anticipatively of our knowledge of God as Father, and ourselves His *sons*. He is speaking there not on the platform of our earthly circumstances where a Father's care and protection attend us every day and hour, but on the platform of what is heavenly, as @John 20 further develops. He says, "I ascend." It is not a matter of earth and earthly conditions, of care and discipline, but of what is heavenly. He says, "I ascend to my Father and your Father." Behind it lies all the import of the other names. "My Father and your Father," and the Father thus known would have praise according to His name. While He would maintain all the other relations in which God is made known, and praise accompanying each, yet we have this great elevation. "I ascend to my Father and your Father." How wonderful to touch for a few
{11}
moments a realm of praise connected with that name, the Lord pre-eminent, the First-born amongst many brethren, the many sons brought to glory. It is in the mind of the Lord and according to the purpose of God, that God should be known as the Father, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our God and Father, and the praise that befits that name, coming from our hearts, in the responsive love of sons. God loves to look at His people and say of them, "sons of the living God." "Let my son go, that he may serve me." So it is in the mind of God to have the service of sons who know God as Father. The apostle speaks of it in Ephesians. He says, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who... has taken us into favour in the Beloved." We are brought into that same favour. The Lord says in @John 17, "That the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them." Oh, what praise flows from that name! "According to thy name... so is thy praise."
Well, dear brethren, one would commend us to God, as the apostle says when leaving the saints at Ephesus, "I commend you to God." There is that in God to which he could commend the saints on the Ephesian platform. He says, "I commend you to God." God becomes greater and greater to us. We hasten the day of God. Peter speaks of hastening the day of God, the day when God will be all in all. I think that is becoming increasingly attractive to us, that God is to be all in all. In every setting God is to be all in all. When the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell with them, and He shall be their God, and wrapped up in that name is all that
{12}
can be known of Him. He is all that I have indicated and more than I could ever name, the background of all being His inscrutability and absoluteness, but the unfolding of what may be known, is to the end that the heart may find everything in God.
The Lord would help us to reach that in our spirits, that we hold nothing apart from God, our affections, our bodies, our homes, our time, our relationships, our business. The spirit of what is going to fill eternity would lead us to hold everything in relation to God as finding God our exceeding joy. God will fill every heart to the exclusion of everything else. Peter exhorts us to hasten that day, to bring it nearer. We bring it nearer by letting what will fill that day fill our hearts now. In the light of His name, is not such a God worthy to be everything? There will ever be a stream of living praise ascending to God. The Lord would maintain that in the assembly now, in its own proper elevation. "In the midst of the assembly," He says, "will I sing thy praises." He declares the name of God to us to that end.
{13}
READING 1
@Judges 6: 1-27
W.J.H. I suggested this scripture as calculated to stimulate what must be in some hearts in this city at the present time -- the necessity of being available to the Lord, so that God's people do not suffer from oppression, but that the work of God may go on. Gideon's experience shows what the Lord can do with one man, and a young man, if He finds conditions with him that He can recognise. The sense of weakness and timidity, and the necessity of being sure of one's ground, do not prevent the Lord using one. Evidently Gideon was timid like Timothy in the New Testament, but the Lord would bear with much to help forward one on whom He has His eye. I feel there would be one or more going through certain exercises in view of supplying what is needed here, through the loss of those whom the Lord has seen fit to take. Gideon's early history shows conditions serviceable to the Lord.
F.C. God's valuation of Gideon and of what he was doing, and Gideon's own estimate of what he was doing, are two different things.
W.J.H. They stand in striking contrast.
W.K. To what are you referring particularly as to Gideon himself?
W.J.H. The angel speaks to him as to a mighty man of valour, but Gideon has no such conception of himself; he has a very deep sense of his own littleness, and of the feebleness of the day he is in, and of his household, and of his part in matters,
{14}
but he was doing something greatly valued by heaven.
Rem. He was threshing wheat by the wine-press.
W.J.H. Yes, he felt urgently the necessity for providing food, and however small in himself, he would give himself to the great service of securing and protecting food for God's people.
F.C. It was very important at that particular moment, on account of what the Midianites and the Amalekites were doing -- destroying food. Gideon, in doing this, was agreeable to heaven.
A.H. The people of Israel were greatly impoverished.
W.J.H. Quite so, through the Midianites. There are other enemies in other parts of this book. God uses various servants -- in some places a woman is used. Here it is the Midianites and their activities to impoverish God's people. They represent the line of "trading" in divine things; "trading" in what is of God. That seems to be the particular feature of the Midianite from the outset -- they buy Joseph, and they sell Joseph. Gideon stands in contrast to them; typically he feels the great loss sustained through that kind of thing, and he will do what he can to provide food and secure it as available to Israel.
A.H. Would you give a practical illustration of what it means today to sell the truth?
W.J.H. The apostle Paul said, even in his day, that he was not as the many who made a trade of the word of God. I do not know anything more humbling than to think that this came in so early. Midianitish trading in the word of God, is using it for selfish aggrandisement. It is this element we
{15}
have to meet. If we are before the Lord, the Lord will help us, and use us individually to serve His people, provided that what is done is not done for ourselves or for our aggrandisement.
W.K. The word applies there, "Buy the truth and sell it not."
W.J.H. Quite so. That is a matter the young especially need to look in the face.
J.Th. It came in very early in the book of Acts; Ananias and Sapphira were on that line, and the apostle speaks of those who think that gain is godliness, @1 Timothy 6: 5.
W.J.H. There were so many, like locusts for multitude. The apostle speaks of the many who were on Midianitish lines. Gideon learned to judge and hate that kind of thing.
J.K.J. He says later to the men of Succoth, "Give... loaves... to the people," and when they would not give he said, I will thresh you. Is that the thought, to give loaves?
W.J.H. Quite; he was not a Midianite. Ananias and Sapphira were Midianites in principle. Barnabas was not, he was a "giver."
J.K.J. Paul also; he said, "Woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel." He felt the necessity was laid on him, and he would provide for God's people.
W.J.H. One believes the Lord is undoubtedly beckoning to many young men in this city to move on such lines that will lead to their being available to feed and help His people. The first thing we need to face is not giving place to the Midianite -- serving for our own glory, to secure some place for ourselves.
E.J. Much service takes place in the wine-press.
{16}
W.J.H. I am sure that pressure is needed to eliminate this element from our hearts.
W.K. If we judge the Midianitish principle in our own hearts we would be available for this service.
W.J.H. Quite so.
F.C. What is the force of the children of Israel making for themselves dens in the mountains, and caves and strongholds? Does that answer in any way to the present position?
W.J.H. It suggests that they could not go into the open. They had to be hidden, instead of being publicly in divine territory.
F.C. It would answer to the present moment. It would be futile to attempt to correct the Midianites in the open; the only thing that could be done was to retire into what is obscure. It is a day when much is being done in obscurity.
W.J.H. Gideon learned the value of being hidden. What he gets he hides. He is not on the line of publicity. It is a very great matter -- to begin any service for the Lord by judging the element of publicity.
J.Th. It is most interesting to note, in that connection, that our Lord Himself was for three years in public service and thirty years in obscurity.
W.J.H. Some of us have been noticing recently how the feature of being hidden runs through Moses' life, the great man of God. His parents hid him when he was born, and this feature goes through his life, until at the end God even hides his burying-place. If we are to be serviceable to God we must judge seeking publicity. Gideon was in keeping with that.
{17}
He was threshing wheat in the wine-press, and hiding the food.
G.H. We need to remember our reward is yet to come. I was thinking of Balaam with the Midianites. He loved the wages of unrighteousness.
W.J.H. He wanted the reward now; present reward from Balak.
Ques. Does not the Lord set that out in regard to the treasure hidden in the field? He bought the field, and having found the treasure, He hid it.
W.J.H. Quite so. He went away and hid Himself, we read in one scripture. Though He could not be hidden, the line the Lord was on was not publicity. His brethren said to Him, "Show thyself," but He hid Himself. The Lord would help us while young to accept this feature, for it is not a matter of showing ourselves if we are to be serviceable, but rather, out of love, providing something for God's people.
G.H. Does not the principle of being hidden come out later in the chapter, when the children of the East come up against Israel in the valley of Jezreel (meaning "God sows")? God sowing is the secret of what God is doing -- what is hidden. The conflict stands related to that in our day.
W.J.H. I am sure that is so.
A.H. The thought of the Corinthians reigning as kings was out of place.
W.J.H. We find, in this chapter, the Amalekite and the Midianite are working together. Giving place to the element of trading will also bring in the activities of the flesh, and Satan using them; but, on the other hand, there is the providing of food for God's people and hiding it.
{18}
Ques. Are you suggesting that in the Midianite we get the thought of trading, and in the Amalekite what is destructive?
W.J.H. Quite so. Amalek puts his hand on the throne of God.
Ques. Do we not get the principle through Scripture that one has to be hidden, in secret with God? Gideon here was in secret with God, and later David. The people did not know he was there, but God knew. He addresses Gideon as a mighty man of valour.
W.J.H. Quite. So the angel comes and sits under the oak, and he is watching. He is a heavenly messenger answering to the Lord, for sometimes you cannot be sure whether it is an angel or the Lord speaking. He sits watching this man. The Lord is watching for any who will be serviceable to Him.
Ques. Does it not stand related to the hidden wisdom "predetermined before the ages for our glory?"
W.J.H. Quite so. It is a great thing to get into our souls that we are in the day of what is being hidden according to God. The day of display is coming, it is near, but this is the day when God is hiding what he is doing. "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing."
Rem. The truth set out in Colossians, "your life is hid with Christ in God," is in keeping with what we have in Gideon.
W.J.H. So that a young man starts with the acceptance of being hidden.
J.Th. David had a secret history with God before he met with Goliath.
W.J.H. That history was his strength. It enabled him to come out in public.
{19}
Rem. His own brother did not know his secret history.
W.J.H. So with the Lord -- even John the baptist said, "I knew him not." He comes out at the beginning of his ministry and says, "I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending... is he which baptiseth with the Holy Ghost." Think how completely the Lord was hidden for those thirty years, that John the baptist says, "I knew him not."
G.H. It is very striking that this food is not to be known publicly. Gideon was threshing wheat in the wine-press. It is made evident that food of this kind is not known in the public position of christendom.
W.J.H. He hid it to secure it. They would seize anything that could be found, but Gideon hid it there so that it could not be found.
W.K. What is the thought as to wheat?
W.J.H. It is food that brings in another character of man. The wheat refers to what Christ is according to God's purpose, another character of manhood, that would be content to be hidden. Ever since the lust of the eye operated in the garden of Eden, when Eve saw and took, there is something in every human heart that seeks publicity; but Gideon suggests a character of man that does not seek publicity.
Rem. So it corresponds with the present moment. Everything subsists in Christ Jesus, another kind of Man. In a day of weakness and brokenness this Man comes to light.
W.J.H. So that we have this permanent position,
{20}
the angel of the Lord sitting under the oak. The oak and sitting suggest permanency. He is sitting there watching the life of this young man before He selects him. One thinks of the young men here whom the Lord would bring forward to stand in the ranks. The Lord is sitting watching their secret history.
Ques. Is that calculated to impart stability, to see that the Lord is taking account of any who wish to take up the service?
W.J.H. Quite, and the desire to be acceptable to Him. We labour, "whether present or absent to be acceptable to him."
J.K.J. That is the great thought, to be pleasing to God: However little Gideon is doing he is pleasing God: he could not do much in a wine-press.
F.C. The state of things was not only that the crops that were seen were destroyed, but that there was neither sheep nor ox nor ass left, so that the position was a most abject one indeed.
W.J.H. No food, no sacrifice, no service -- that is what the Midianite brings about.
J.Th. It is very encouraging that, whatever the condition of things around us may be, the firm foundation of God stands, and God is faithful.
A.H. The Lord sat over against the treasury on one occasion to see what was going on, and He took account of it.
W.J.H. Wherever you see the Lord sitting, it indicates a permanent position. Standing is not permanent. In each city where the saints are, the Lord is watching to select those who are serviceable to Him.
Rem. Gideon did not appear at that time to be a
{21}
mighty man of valour, but the angel of the Lord recognises it in him because of the position he had taken.
W.J.H. Quite so; because of the love that actuated his movements, he would secure food for the people of God.
A.H. Terrible conditions existed in contrast to what was of God, and that such a person should appear in these conditions, in the presence of such evil, was valuable to heaven.
W.J.H. So the angel of the Lord said, "The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour."
Ques. Does that suggest the hidden motive of his heart?
W.J.H. The Lord is looking for pure motives, for hearts who will judge the Midianite. He found it in Gideon, for Gideon could never fight the Midianite if he had not dealt with that principle in his own soul.
W.K. The Lord said to Gideon, "Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel. ..." Do we see the spirit of service set out here? He accepted the low place in view of being taken up by the Lord for this great service.
W.J.H. So that when the angel says, "The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour," Gideon says, "if the Lord be with us." That is a remarkable evidence of a man who has judged the Midianite. He is not going to make himself the centre of his service. He says, "if the Lord be with us." If we are going to serve the Lord we want the "us" in our hearts, not "me." That is, he makes the people of God the centre of the matter. When Gideon said that, the angel of the Lord looked on him (a most
{22}
remarkable expression), as much as to indicate, Here is a man the Lord recognises.
Rem. He was one the Lord could put His hand upon.
W.J.H. The secret of any service is that we are conscious of being recognised by the Lord. The Lord looked on him. That is not a general matter as expressed in the word "all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do." This is the Lord recognising the man *in a personal way*.
Rem. There were features on which God's eye could rest with approval.
W.J.H. Quite so. "To this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit."
J.C. He took in all the people of God; his heart went out to them all.
W.J.H. He did not have himself as the centre. The bane of Midianitish service is that self is enthroned. But Gideon says, "If the Lord be with US"
F.C. What follows is important. The Lord said He would save Israel -- not a few. He had nothing less than Israel in His mind.
J.M. Gideon said, "wherewith shall I save Israel... I am the least in my father's house."
W.J.H. I believe the Lord would help us to make room for this personal recognition as consciously known. It is the life-spring of true service.
Rem. I was thinking of the "us" -- that would show what was on the mind and heart of Gideon. He had the people of God before him.
W.J.H. That, I believe, is what drew out that look. The Lord looked on a man who was delivered from himself as a centre. We do not know how much
{23}
self becomes the centre of our activities unless we keep in touch with the Lord.
Rem. Think of the holy and true devotedness to God in the One who came not to do His own will, but for God's glory.
W.J.H. It is the secret of continuity. What has marked true leaders who have spoken to us the word of God was that they had not themselves as the centre. Those dear brethren who have served faithfully to the end have had the Lord and His people as the centre, not themselves; and the Lord looked on them, and He is sitting under the oak looking for more.
G.H. Was not Gideon deeply concerned as to what had overtaken Israel, not only from the Midianite, but from God's hand? The Lord had delivered them into the hand of the Midianite, and Gideon recognised that; and following that, the angel says, "Go in this thy might."
W.J.H. God brings us governmentally under certain influences that we have not judged. When we do not judge evil principles, God allows us to feel their power.
F.C. What follows is that He begins to rehearse what God had done.
W.J.H. It is a great matter that we never forget what God has done. That keeps us humble, and stabilises faith. His mind goes right back to what God did in Egypt. He says, I want to see the same kind of thing now.
W.K. Does the value of the prophetic word come in here? It brings all that out, and would tend to humble us.
{24}
W.J.H. It would bring out what God has done in the past, as well as what He will do in the future.
J.Th. In connection with those who have spoken to us the word of God, it says, "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever." It is not only what He was in the past, and what He is in the future, but what He is now.
W.J.H. Yes. Leaders have gone, but Jesus Christ has not gone. It says, "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God... Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever."
J.Th. I was thinking of what the king said to Gehazi, Elisha's servant. "Tell me... all the great things that Elisha hath done." That was not going to help them. We want to know what the Lord is doing today.
W.J.H. Yes, and this is one thing that the Lord is doing today; He is bringing forward those who are serviceable to Him.
F.C. It is encouraging to think that Gideon is of the tribe of Manasseh, and the least in his father's house.
W.J.H. A very valuable element; we need to be maintained constantly in a sense of our own littleness. You will find that those the Lord helps are preserved in a sense of their own littleness. It was when Saul got away from that that he was dismissed. So the Midianitish element that wants to be great was judged in Gideon.
W.K. Does it come out in the change of Saul's name to Paul? We need to have our names changed. Paul said, "when I am weak, then am I strong."
W.J.H. Paul told the truth when he said that he was less than the least of saints. What he said was
{25}
true; while we cannot understand it, yet he told the truth.
Rem. It was no sentimental expression. It was what he really felt.
W.J.H. It was what he felt, and this is what Gideon felt. The angel said he was a mighty man of valour, but Gideon did not say that.
J.Th. While, of course, when the truth was at stake, Paul was not a whit behind the greatest of the apostles.
W.J.H. Though I be nothing, he said. And so Gideon, as delivered further from the Midianitish principle, proposes to bring an offering, and what he brings discloses what he had. What he had was acceptable -- a kid of the goats, and fine flour, unleavened; and he put what he brought in a basket and in a pot.
J.K.J. Are you suggesting that if a young man has experience with God, he will have something to yield to God?
W.J.H. Quite so. Any brother who has a little of what this means will be serviceable. It is so acceptable to God, that He tarries for it. Jehovah waited for it to be brought forward.
J.Th. Paul says, "every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue..." It was quite right that they brought these things, was it not?
W.J.H. The Lord knows that if He is going to use anyone, that person must have something, he must not appear empty before Him. This is what Gideon had, and his instincts told him what would be suitable.
J.C. What would a kid of the goats represent today?
{26}
W.J.H. That he had the early features of a separate walk. It is seen perfectly in Christ, of course. Let no one undertake to serve if he has not a kid of the goats.
Ques. Is it an apprehension of Christ as applied to His walk -- comely in His going?
W.J.H. Yes, as separate from everything here that is dishonouring to God. A separate walk is needful if we are to be available for this service.
Rem. The separate walk would secure the support of God.
W.J.H. Yes, and we would be acceptable. What Gideon brought was acceptable, and he brought it in a vessel. No doubt the teaching of the New Testament would show that it was in himself. Paul makes much of the persons being vessels. It is not simply a theory or a doctrine, but something that is in the vessel.
Ques. Is the idea of a vessel that you are formed by the truth?
W.J.H. How much there is with us that is only in word instead of being in the vessel, in the person himself.
F.C. Would you enlarge on that a little?
W.J.H. We all hold the truth of separation from what is unholy. It is a doctrine, a truth that is held tenaciously, but we want that separate position in persons livingly, not abstractly as doctrine, but in persons. And so as we behold the even purity in the life of Jesus, the Lord wants the same features in us as vessels. Gideon had these two great thoughts in vessels, and heaven accepts that.
J.Th. Is that what came out in Paul when he
{27}
says, "thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life..."?
W.J.H. The manner of life was the expression of the doctrine in the vessel. A serviceable person is one who has things in life in himself as a vessel.
The angel's presence here is an appearing. It is not a matter of public worship; it is not what belongs to the tabernacle, but is a secret appearing of the Lord to Gideon; and the Lord is prepared to disclose Himself to each one of us, and that disclosure is the spring of our service; but He discloses Himself where conditions are according to Himself. Hence the angel was sitting under the oak *watching*.
Ques. Does the disclosure give a name -- Jehovah-shalom -- would that set forth the impression he received?
W.J.H. Many of us think that an appearing is confined to the death-bed, just as we are crossing the border. No doubt the Lord does disclose Himself to many of His saints when they are passing away, in a way we little understand; but He is prepared to manifest Himself to our hearts in a living way during our lives, and thus fit us to take our part in the service of God. One would urge that the young men do not dismiss this as a sentiment or theory, for where there are living conditions suitable to the eye that is watching, there will follow an appearing.
G.H. Do you not think that Israel's condition in that day indicates that this service is relative to a corresponding state of things in our own day?
W.J.H. No doubt the whole book is in accord with where we are, and it is encouraging to see what the Lord will do to help His people through one brother
{28}
or sister -- in the previous chapter it is Deborah; she said, "The villages ceased, ...until that I Deborah arose, a mother in Israel." A sister who is overcoming can be a great help and a great blessing in this city to the people of God.
Ques. Generally speaking, the saints were in a low spiritual state: should that not exercise us?
W.J.H. Indeed the Midianites are everywhere. Publicly the whole profession of Christianity is in the power of the Midianite.
Rem. Israel, feeling their impoverishment, cry to the Lord.
W.J.H. And the Lord raised up judges for their deliverance. The Lord loves to do this mediately. He could do it Himself, but His way is to use others; and He is looking in every place for those He can use to help His people.
Ques. Would you say that when Gideon builds the altar, he makes permanent the impression he received from God?
W.J.H. That is so. And the next thing is that God instructs him to destroy idolatry in his father's house: for, once there has been an appearing, the Lord will not allow idolatry in the heart. We do not realise how much there is of it. Every appearing will call for a fresh dealing with idols.
A.H. Will you make a practical application of that? We have the word, "Little children, keep yourselves from idols."
W.J.H. Supposing some young man becomes conscious that the Lord has looked on him and spoken to him, that young man's idea of business, of money, of pleasure, of many another thing, will be reviewed.
{29}
Many a thing he may have done until then with a good conscience; but when the Lord has disclosed Himself to his heart, then his Saturday afternoons become a different matter, money becomes a different matter. What follows the appearing is that Gideon is instructed to overthrow this altar to Baal; there are many Baals: there are various forms of idolatry in human hearts, but the divine intent is that we should recognise, in a worshipful spirit, that "to us there is but one God."
F.C. What a triumph to see that the bullocks are taken. Evidently Gideon's father was a worshipper of Baal. The second bullock was to be taken and burnt with the wood.
W.J.H. The thing is judged completely, and yet the end shows that there is great timidity in Gideon. He did it at night, but the Lord does not reject him for it. Some of us feel so feeble and timid; but the Lord does not despise our timidity, as long as He sees truth in the inward parts.
F.C. He threw down the altar. It is very striking how he develops in power, fitting him for the final overthrow of the enemy.
W.J.H. His anxiety that the Lord should be with him helped him at every point. He is very anxious to be sure that the Lord is with him; and the Lord is very gracious to assure him of it.
Ques. Why is it the second bullock of the age of seven years? That is the time they were under the domination of Midian.
W.J.H. I do not know; but the thought of the seven would perhaps have reference to the apprehension of Christ in that way, in His perfect devotedness to God. The seven years would suggest that.
J.K.J. It has been suggested that the sovereignty of God came in in the second. God will take up what is available.
W.K. We took up the subject of crossing of the hands last Lord's Day -- does that principle enter into the choice of the second?
W.J.H. Yes, everything for God is connected with the second.
F.C. And it is a burnt offering.
{30}
READING 2
@Judges 7:1-22; @Judges 8:22-27
W.J.H. What was before us previously was the character of the man the Lord selects in a day of persecution and distress to help His people. Firstly, one working in secret, hiding what he was doing. Secondly, one with the people of God before him rather than himself as a centre, and thus conscious of divine recognition; the Lord looking on him. Then he had a kid of the goats, and unleavened cakes, placing these in vessels -- meaning, I believe, that he had what these things represent *in himself*, not simply abstractly as doctrine, but livingly in himself as a vessel. And, finally, however feeble he was, prepared to judge idolatry. The sixth chapter develops these great features of the man the Lord selects. Let this be a voice to us all, especially to the young men, for if the Lord tarry they are to be used in His service. The Lord is looking for suitable vessels to use, like the angel sitting under the oak, watching.
This afternoon we might take up some of the lessons Gideon is taught, so that he is able to go on with the work of God and help the people.
F.C. When you say "the lessons," what have you in mind?
W.J.H. One we did not read, but is well known to the brethren; the question of the dew. It was a great matter with Gideon that he should be assured that God was with him by the presence of the dew.
A.H. What does that mean for us today?
W.J.H. It suggests impressions received by the
{31}
Spirit; coming in a silent, gracious, gentle way, but wonderfully refreshing. The thing that counts is, Where is the Spirit of God? And Gideon is concerned to be sure that he had God with him by that sign.
A.H. Really, nothing can be done apart from the Spirit of God; nothing vital can be done in the hearts of His people apart from the Spirit.
W.J.H. People may question all kinds of things and challenge teaching, but if the Spirit of God is with His people that settles everything. Gideon can go on as long as he is assured that God is with him by the Spirit.
F.C. Would you apply what is involved in the fleece? There are two signs in relation to the fleece.
W.J.H. I have no doubt there is much teaching in that, but the point seems to be that he wants to be assured.
W.K. Is giving place to the Spirit and the recognition of the Spirit in view of the carrying on of the work of God?
W.J.H. I think so. He attaches great importance to this unseen heavenly power, and if we are to serve God we must learn that power lies there.
F.W. Is this evidence for the support of the servant rather than the support of the army?
W.J.H. It is for the confirmation of Gideon. If he can be assured that heaven is supporting him, that the influence of heaven is with him, he can move on in confidence.
F.W. So that the servant is quite right in looking to the Lord for definite evidence, a secret matter between his own soul and his Master, that he is moving on right lines.
{32}
W.J.H. And nothing affords that more than the gracious reviving influence of the Spirit of God over the heart, when facing a test.
Rem. In Deuteronomy Moses says, "my speech shall distil as the dew," and finishes by ascribing greatness to our God. That would confirm what you are saying as to giving confidence to the servant.
W.J.H. Quite so. The mind of God comes that way, like the dew. "My speech shall distil as the dew" -- that is how God teaches His people, by the Spirit in the gentle influence of heaven; and when the servant is conscious that the dew is in his favour he is now ready to go on.
F.C. Does this chapter give us Gideon's movements as definitely encouraged and taught in relation to what came to him in the dew on the fleece? We see the men mustered here.
W.J.H. Yes, he is ready to proceed, to take up the conflict on behalf of God's people.
J.Th. And is he to find vessels suitable in that way?
W.J.H. Quite so. Whom can he influence? So the first thing is to pitch his position by a spring. It is named, but the point is it is a spring or a well. That is where he camps with his army.
F.C. Is that the Spirit in a personal way? You referred to the gentle influence of the dew. Does the spring speak of energy?
W.J.H. The spring speaks of power -- unlimited power; not in strong statements and arguments and strife, but there is power in the Spirit to carry on the conflict.
C.McA. Paul's word to the Corinthians was, "my
{33}
speech... was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power."
W.J.H. Quite so, words which the Holy Spirit teaches. It has been pointed out in regard to Moses, that the energy he had acquired in Egypt, leading to slaying the Egyptian had to be judged. Later he sits by the well, to learn that in the well there is the power of God for him, and that is a great matter. If we are to serve God, our energy for the conflict and for the service is in this spring. We are very slow to come to this, and hence often use carnal weapons.
Rem. This mighty living energy of the Spirit is to be the power that is used in this service.
W.J.H. The idea of a spring is different from that of a well in this country, which is often just soakage from the, hills; but the spring is really unlimited resource, and is a wonderful figure of the Spirit of God here.
W.K. Does that correspond with what we get in "Spring up, O well?" -- It is a springing well.
W.J.H. That is the idea. Then the next great lesson which Gideon has to learn is that his resources are not in numbers. He learns to value the dew for his own confirmation, and he evidently appreciates the thought of a spring, but God sees that it is necessary for him to learn not to put his confidence in numbers.
F.C. What does that convey to us?
W.J.H. When it comes to conflict between what is of God and the powers of evil we have to learn that our strength is not in numbers. Those whom the Lord would use He would so equip that, if necessary, they would be prepared to stand alone. That is, their
{34}
power is not in numbers. While thankful, of course, for every brother and sister available, and we would not lose one if we could save them, yet the ability to serve God does not lie in the strength of numbers.
Rem. I was thinking of the dew on the fleece -- in intercourse God proved him and made Himself known to him. Now he had to learn that God would be his only support.
W.J.H. So that, as having God before us, we are delivered from our fears. The lesson is that those who are afraid are disqualified.
F.W. Is that why the test in connection with the dew comes first in relation to the fleece, and afterwards in relation to all the ground? It is as if he would discover that the Lord was supporting him by the Spirit, and that God was with him, and what he found was that the power of God with him would thus spread in blessing to the people.
W.J.H. That is very good. So that, as helped with the conscious influence of heaven over your own soul, it becomes the means of helping others, and delivering them from their fears. The more we know God, the more are we delivered from the timidity and fear that is natural to us.
W.K. Is the snare in numbers that they take credit to themselves in the conflict? God says, He will not give His glory to another.
W.J.H. Evidently Gideon is not overwhelmed by the loss of so many. He does not appear to be distressed because so many go back, for he has learned through the dew and the spring; and his confidence is in God.
F.C. I suppose his position indicated that he placed
{35}
them in relation to this spring, he would have been quite prepared if even a greater number had gone. "Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the Lord of hosts."
W.J.H. So he is not overwhelmed, because the spring is still there. That is a great lesson for young men to learn, that God has placed His Spirit as available to His servants and His people to support us.
F.W. Do you suggest that would have a practical bearing for us at the present time, as finding that whatever the host of the enemy, we have to learn individually that God will be with us if we are with Him, quite irrespective of what others may do. I must learn what it is to count upon God for myself.
W.J.H. Yes; and the recognition that this living spring is here will keep your heart quiet and restful instead of being amongst those who are afraid. As God said, "The word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, and my Spirit, remain among you," @Haggai 2: 5. Those available may be few, and the Lord may see fit in His wisdom to call away some who have helped us, but this spring is here, and that would save us from being overwhelmed with fear that the enemy will prevail.
F.W. It should be a matter of exercise for us that there was this army of thirty-two thousand with Gideon, willing soldiers, nevertheless so many of them went away. We might be in the company of the people of God, but we have to know God for ourselves though we are in that company.
W.J.H. That is what one had in mind. The Lord would encourage all to face this question of fear by calling attention to the Spirit.
{36}
F.W. As you say, that will never fail.
W.J.H. No one has ever bottomed the depths of the spring. Distrust of ourselves is right. Working out your own salvation in fear and trembling is right, but fear that arises from an exaggerated sense of the power of the enemy, and not having a proper sense of the greatness of the Spirit of God, disqualifies us for conflict. So the Lord would help us to have a right sense of the greatness of the Spirit of God.
J.M. God can confine His operations to a small sphere, as in the fleece, but there are unlimited resources as in the spring.
W.J.H. He can cause the blessed influence of heaven to come into your heart. He can make the very influence of heaven, with all its blessed refreshment, fill your heart; and He can give you a sense of the resources available by the presence of the Spirit of God here; so that both sides would keep you free from fear.
J.C. If God be for us, who can be against us? Do you think Gideon had the sense of that in his soul?
W.J.H. Yes, I am sure he had.
W.K. "God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind."
W.J.H. That is a very good passage of Scripture as to our subject. The more we realise the power of the Spirit here, the more we are delivered from the natural cowardice of our hearts. With many of us, the Holy Spirit's presence is largely theoretic, hence our fears and timidity; whereas the Lord would have us to see that the Spirit of God is here, and available, so that we may move on in confidence.
Ques. Does that mean that the presence of the
{37}
Spirit becomes a test to us when facing any position? Being brought to the water also becomes a test.
W.J.H. Quite so. There are these myriads like grasshoppers in multitude -- where am I to get my power? I think that is what it means. I am to draw from the Spirit of God as power to face this matter.
P.H. What is the matter to be faced particularly in regard to the Midianite?
W.J.H. The Midianite is the enemy's attack by trading with the things of Christianity, one of the greatest powers Satan uses against the truth.
Ques. Is it supposing gain is godliness?
W.J.H. That is the New Testament language as to this enemy.
Ques. Would you say that element may be in our hearts, and we must face it?
W.J.H. Our ability to face it in others will be as having faced it in ourselves. Gideon certainly faced it in himself.
Rem. The Midianite principle being operative would deprive the people of God of food.
W.J.H. If we are handling divine things for our own gain the saints are being robbed of what they should have as food. Then the next great lesson follows, for God says to him, bring those who are left down to the water, and I will test them. I believe that is something the Lord is calling us to face at the moment. He will line us up at the water and test us for the service of God.
F.V. It is rather striking that God says, "I will try them for thee."
W.J.H. It is a very solemn thing. God is handling
{38}
each one of us to see whether we are serviceable, and He is using the water as the means of testing.
J.M. Does the water suggest that we are tested as to things that are right and needful, but we might indulge too much in them?
W.J.H. I think that is the bearing of it. The water here does not refer to the Spirit of God as the spring; it refers to what is necessary here; the mercies of this life, as necessary to all; but God tests us whether we allow them to dominate us or whether we control them and use them and pass on.
A.H. What is first in our mind -- is that the idea? The king's business requires haste.
W.J.H. Quite so. Those who lap as a dog laps take just what they require, and no doubt thank God and proceed with their true business; but those who get down on their knees come under the power of the water and are sent home. The Lord is testing every brother and sister in this room with regard to our bodies, our homes, our occupations; we are all lined up, and the question is, Are we under the power of these things so that they control us, or are we using them simply as necessary things, our real object being the Lord's interests?
J.C. Would that scripture apply, "whether we live... or die, we are the Lord's"?
W.J.H. That would be true to such as lap the water.
C.McA. Is bowing down the attitude of worship -- worshipping the creature more than the Creator?
W.J.H. That is instructive. Bowing down is that the water has control over you.
W.K. Would you say that the things that are
{39}
given to us in the way of mercies from God are to be held as subservient?
W.J.H. We suffer great loss through many a brother or sister going back; disqualified by giving their lives to their business or their homes or their health; giving over their being to these things instead of using them thankfully, as contributing to what is necessary to this life, and passing on.
Rem. So the thought is that we should hold ourselves for the Lord's interests.
W.J.H. Well, we are all tested. God is testing us as to whether we are bowing down to the water or are lapping it.
E.A.M. Do we get the same thought in, "No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life"?
W.J.H. Yes; that is very similar. Soldiers must eat, must drink, must care for the body, to some extent, but that is not what they are living for.
F.W. John says we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. I was wondering whether it would be right to think of the water as what we have on the line of mercy and privilege. If we take up Christianity only on the line of the blessing that it brings to ourselves, we shall hardly be available for service. There was nothing wrong with the water, but it was the resting in the supply, making that the objective, that disqualified.
W.J.H. Quite so. It could be applied to spiritual things becoming our objective rather than the Lord and His people; but I am sure it is a very real test on the earthly side, and especially to the young. Perhaps as we grow older the power of these things may
{40}
not be so great with us, but as young men and women much time is lost by bowing down to them, letting these things get control of us.
F.W. It is very serious that nearly ten thousand had to go back from this test.
W.J.H. That shows how great a matter it is for us to face. None of us want to be disqualified from being in the conflict in the Lord's interests.
Ques. Would you say those who lapped were ready to move on in the conflict, but those who bowed down were detained?
W.J.H. Speaking typically, such as lapped would undoubtedly give God thanks, they would not be unmindful of His mercies, but they were not detained by them.
J.Th. "They that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not."
W.J.H. That is very good. It goes even to the question of marriage, which seems an important matter; but when the Lord's interests come before us it says, "they that have wives be as though they had none."
A.McC. Would the scripture in the Corinthian epistle apply, All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient? (@1 Corinthians 10: 23)
W.J.H. Very good. It is the being brought under their power that damages the soul.
J.M. Is this akin to the parable in which the Lord spoke of those who bought a piece of land, etc. -- they were not wrong things, but they were held by them.
W.J.H. Exactly. So let us keep this in our minds,
{41}
especially the young men whom God is testing in view of helping His people in this city and elsewhere.
Rem. In this lesson, Gideon is really going from strength to strength.
W.J.H. Yes; indeed there is no evidence that he is even grieved at the loss of these people. On his side confidence in God is continued.
Rem. I was wondering whether that would encourage our young people, as taking the view that Gideon took; that the approved might be made manifest.
W.J.H. Quite so. We want to be in that three hundred; we do not want to be with those whom God says have to go back, as not available. The brethren in this city know those who are available, those who put the Lord's interests first. We all want to be amongst them.
Rem. That is, they are qualified in that way to form part of the three hundred.
W.J.H. Quite so. The beloved brother whom the Lord has recently taken home stood out in this city as one who put the Lord's interests first in his life, and that is why he had such a place in the affections of the brethren. Now, let us all go in for that. Why not? It is a very real test, and we must begin as young men, not wait until we are old, it is often too late then.
Ques. Is that a lesson to be learned from Jacob's history? He spent too much of his time acquiring his flocks, etc.
W.J.H. Much time was lost in Laban's house, and a great deal of what he gathered up did not help him. If the young men would keep this in mind, that God
{42}
is testing them -- God may be allowing them to prosper, perhaps, in their occupation or in their profession, or in their homes -- He is watching, and testing them to see whether they are going to lie down to this water or just lap it and use it thankfully and proceed with His interests.
A.H. Would that result in being serviceable to the Master as Paul says in 2 Timothy? With trumpets and pitchers they were now equipped as serviceable to the Lord.
W.J.H. That is the next great position seen with these men, each one of them now has a trumpet, a torch and a pitcher.
F.W. And in that position the whole host of Midian was beneath them, as it says in the end of verse 8. The camp of Midian was beneath them in the valley. They were superior to the Midianite.
W.J.H. That is interesting. They were morally above them. These three hundred men would seem very paltry as compared with the enemy, who were like grasshoppers for multitude. Their weapons were trumpets, torches, and pitchers.
F.C. It says they took victuals in their hand and their trumpets. Does that suggest that, as having lapped and moved on, they are found with victuals and with trumpets ready to sound at any given moment?
W.J.H. Yes, the two go together. The victuals are food -- we must have food. The Midianites sought to take the food away, but these three hundred men had food and they valued it -- they took victuals.
W.K. Do we get the same thought at the Jordan in connection with preparing victuals -- there must
{43}
be the spiritual capacity to face this exercise and to take up this conflict.
W.J.H. If we are to be amongst the three hundred we must have food. Food is available and we must take it.
E.A.M. Were these men marked by having spiritual constitutions?
W.J.H. That is what food would develop. It is a great matter as preparing for our part in the testimony, the having of food. Communion with the Lord, and the reading of the Scriptures, and the attendance to the ministry, are of paramount importance if we are to be in the three hundred.
J.Th. Hebrews says, "consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds." We need to consider the Lord in that way.
W.J.H. Yes, all concentrates in Him.
F.W. It is very interesting with reference to ministry, they took the victuals of the people. There was a ministry provided by God, it was available for all those who believed. They took the victuals of the people and they went with the trumpets.
W.J.H. No brother is helpful to the saints anywhere who does not value the ministry the Lord gives. These men took victuals, the victuals were available for the people.
A.H. The ministry is for all. These three hundred took it, they valued it. Are we valuing it?
W.J.H. They valued it, they realised they could not go on without it. I sometimes wonder whether some of us really believe that the Spirit of God is speaking. It is not simply a question of what this
{44}
brother or that brother says. The Spirit of God has a voice in our day as in every day, and are we listening to it as if God were speaking? God is speaking by His Spirit through His servants.
F.W. It is not merely an opening up of Scripture or an explanation of certain truths, but it is heaven's supply for the need of God's people at the present moment.
W.J.H. Exactly. It says, "by a prophet the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved," @Hosea 12: 13. God preserves His people by prophetic ministry. "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches." It is as real today as it was at Pentecost. Surely none would allow the thought that a divine Person is on the earth and He is not speaking! Some admit that He spoke a hundred years ago but that He has not spoken since. The Scripture says, "the Spirit speaketh expressly," @1 Timothy 4: 1.
Rem. In Hebrews we learn there is divine speaking today, chapter 3. There is the present living voice of the Spirit.
W.J.H. Quite so. It is an insult to the Spirit of God to assume that there is not the present voice of the Spirit in the assembly. The Spirit's present voice provides food for the moment. This does not discredit the Scriptures, but the Spirit brings expressly what is wanted for the moment.
Ed.M. There is nothing mystical about it. It is all marked by divine simplicity.
W.J.H. What is spiritual is never mystical. It deals with great mysteries, but is not mystical.
The last matter one had in mind is the effect in
{45}
these three hundred whom Gideon leads, for he is a model to them, and that is a great matter, if we are to help the brethren. There is nothing more effective than a model. Gideon says, "As I do, so shall ye do." That is the way to help a brother. Mere speaking is not as effective as that kind of teaching. Then there is the great result reached by the breaking of the earthen pitcher, displaying the light, and its effect on the enemy.
Ques. What is the meaning of that?
W.J.H. What God has given you for the brethren here will be effective as you are prepared to die as to your body instead of regarding the protecting of your life as the main objective. It is as the pitcher is broken that the light is operative.
A.H. Is that beautifully exemplified in the apostle Paul?
W.J.H. Death works in us and life in you. We are going to help each other if we are prepared to sacrifice ourselves.
Rem. So that it says, "Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, ...that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh."
W.J.H. It is a great test, because of what we are naturally, but God will help us and use us if we are prepared to sacrifice ourselves. I believe that is what the breaking of the pitcher means.
F.C. That is the end of every feature of the Midianite. There is no bargaining with one who is prepared to be broken like that.
W.J.H. Very good. It shows how, up to this point, Gideon had judged the Midianitish principle.
{46}
Ques. Do the trumpets suggest testimony going out in power?
W.J.H. I think so. These trumpets and these lights are what terrify the enemy, but the light does its work as the earthen vessel is broken.
W.K. Is the force of the word in @2 Corinthians 4, "we have this treasure in earthen vessels," to show the character of the vessels?
W.J.H. Quite. The treasure is the light. "God, who commanded the light to shine... hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ." We have this treasure in an earthen vessel, and the apostle was prepared for the vessel to be broken. It will help the saints if brothers and sisters contribute their part -- sacrifice their bodies, their strength, their time.
J.C. Does the breaking of the pitcher suggest that they are looking for that which is eternal?
W.J.H. That is the secret of Paul's life. "While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen." Supposing that by a little more devotedness we live a year less, or even five years less, but serve the Lord more, what does it matter? We ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.
Ques. Was not Epaphroditus a great example of what you are speaking of?
W.J.H. He was nigh unto death in his service to fill up what was needed. The Lord will help any who are prepared to follow this example.
F.C. The Lord Jesus pursued it Himself. "He... being wearied with his journey, sat thus on the well." Yet He continued His service in that condition.
{47}
W.J.H. Quite so. The last section read is a word of warning, for after this period of devotedness on the part of Gideon we find that he desires some reward for himself. They come to him saying, Be our king; you have saved us; rule over us, thou and thy sons. What an appeal to the human heart! Gideon says, I will not rule over you, my sons will not rule over you: God will rule over you. But then he says, I will take some ear-rings; and it became a snare to him. After all, naturally we would like a little recognition from the brethren. In the main, maybe, we have been devoted, we have served and sacrificed, but towards the end of our days we desire to be recognised, and this is a snare.
F.W. "Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth... and having done all, to stand."
W.J.H. That is the idea; you are never ungirded.
C.F. I was wondering whether the thought of what is involved in the judgment seat of Christ would help us. You were speaking of acceptability; if we accepted in our minds the present application of the judgment seat of Christ, and judged every motive and every thought in the light of that, we would be saved from such a snare.
W.J.H. Yes, the apostle said he laboured, whether present or absent, to be acceptable to Him. Christ was his object, whether present or absent.
J.Th. He would spend and be utterly spent.
W.J.H. Yes. Some of us are ready to spend a little, but not to be spent. To be spent is that your person, your being is spent, not simply your time or your money, but yourself. That costs more than anything else. Think of what is here potentially in this
{48}
room, if every brother or sister began to spend themselves for the Lord Jesus.
Rem. We read of the Lord speaking to Peter, signifying by what death he should glorify God. That is the opposite to seeking any glory for ourselves.
W.J.H. Quite so. Peter was maintained in that. He said, I must shortly put off my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath showed me. Moreover I will endeavour that ye may be able to have these things in remembrance -- showing what his exercise was as to the welfare of the brethren *after* he had died.
A.H. I suppose the Spirit of God would help us to maintain this right on, not looking for any recognition at all.
W.J.H. Time would fail to tell of Gideon. He is a man of valour -- one did not read this part to discredit Gideon, but as a warning to show what our hearts are capable of, that we might be watchful at the end of our days, when the service is nearly over, when the victory is won; we still have to be watchful against this great Midianitish principle.
{49}
READING 3
@Judges 9: 1-20
W.J.H. The instruction that this scripture affords might help us all to be definitely committed to continuance in the service of God, and to be warned as to certain dangers we are exposed to, especially after the death of a leader, for God had removed Gideon, one who had signally helped His people. A great danger arose after Gideon's death, and, in some sense, this danger exists after any leader is removed. The death of a servant of God, who has been recognised as having had influence and leadership, is not infrequently followed by desires on the part of others to secure the place he had, whereas the Lord often intends His people generally or locally to work things out mutually, at least for a time, before He raises up any distinctive leader.
E.J. Would you say the same kind of thing occurred when Adonijah usurped the throne?
W.J.H. Quite so. He said, "I will be king"; whereas God had His eye on Solomon. Later on in Judges we find another judge is raised up, but for the moment we have the seventy sons of Gideon, brought up under Gideon's influence, partaking of his character; and matters amongst Israel are to be taken up and worked out mutually through them. The Lord sometimes orders a period in which mutuality is the outstanding thing of the moment, without any prominent leadership evident.
F.C. So that when a leader is taken, what often
{50}
happens is that what he represented is divided up and carried on as set forth in the seventy.
W.J.H. Often that is the Lord's way; gift and teaching are distributed, affording a mutual basis for development: whereas there is something in our hearts which, if not judged, says, "I will be king." Gideon is gone, and it is a question of these seventy. Who will take up the leadership, the rule?
A.H. We need to watch that the flesh is not active in that way, and to wait patiently for the Lord to indicate.
W.J.H. Quite so.
F.C. Does it fit in with the end of Timothy? At the end of @Judges 8, when the people had gone and followed the Baals again, evidently Gideon's lead was soon forgotten. In the end of Timothy things were to be committed to others, there was nothing outstanding in that way.
W.J.H. Previously there had been Paul, and then Timothy as his delegate; but the final issue is "faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also." "Others" is a very mutual word, is it not?
A.H. Would you say the thought of mutuality is general now amongst the saints?
W.J.H. Of course, one recognises there is leadership, and the Lord has raised up those who outstandingly give a lead; but, particularly in localities, I believe the situation is largely that of mutually working things out, like the day of the seventy sons of Gideon.
J.M. Do you mean that the mutual side of things is the safest?
W.J.H. Well, it is evident that the Lord brings
{51}
about an extension of His work by the mutual development of the things of God locally. It is remarkable how much greater is the blessing where things are developed mutually than where there is only one outstanding gift. I think you will find generally that there is much spiritual prosperity where things are developed mutually. Hence the Lord orders that outstanding gifts are not local, but are set in the assembly viewed universally.
J.M. Is the state of the people to blame here, because there was no kindness shown to the house of Gideon?
W.J.H. That is right; the root is in the state of the people giving an opportunity for such a man as Abimelech to rise.
W.K. Would you say he does not display any feature of a true leader according to God in that he destroys these sons of Gideon? The spirit of destruction is not according to God.
W.J.H. The Captain of our salvation was made perfect through suffering. If anyone aspires to leadership, let him look at the Model, "perfect through sufferings"; I think no one secures right influence amongst the saints who does not suffer.
J.Th. We read of one who loved to have the pre-eminence, do we not?
W.J.H. Yes, he was a New Testament Abimelech. The opportunity to develop ambition arose from special affinities with some; and I believe that this is a matter which needs to be guarded against by every one of us, by not having special friendships. Abimelech had those who were his own flesh and blood
{52}
in a more narrow sense than the seventy, and he operated through them.
F.W. The maintaining of spiritual links promotes that which is mutual, whereas links that are on a narrow line and pertain to what is natural (I do not mean necessarily flesh and blood, but affinities), tend to bring in destruction.
W.J.H. And provide ground for the development of ambition. We have to beware of that, because it will lead to intense cruelty and damage to all concerned.
F.W. Abimeleeh represents that principle, and would you say Jotham represents the opposite principle?
W.J.H. I am sure that is right. His parable discloses that he had something very different in his mind.
F.W. Before you go on to the parable, I was thinking of the place Jotham went to to utter it, Mount Gerizim. He was of the tribe of Manasseh, which is one of the tribes, who were to be on Mount Gerizim to bless the people. So that what Jotham proposes really has blessing in view.
W.J.H. That is interesting. As with Jacob when he blessed his sons, he told them the truth as to themselves, as well as what God had in mind. For instance, he said, "Dan is... an adder in the path, that biteth the horse's heels." You might say, Where is the blessing of Dan? But it consisted in disclosing to Dan the thing he must guard against, because of what Jacob saw in him.
W.K. Referring to special links we might form, the Corinthians had special leaders, "I am of Paul, and I
{53}
of Apollos, and I of Cephas...", and then they were reigning as kings.
W.J.H. Quite so, and prepared to discredit and reject Paul who represented the Lord. So that one would think of the many young men here as potentially for the Lord's service, and it would help them to see the danger of developing special friendships amongst the saints. It does much harm, both to the person himself and those involved, and ultimately caters for ambition.
E.J. Does the matter of leadership rest entirely with God? Even Samuel failed to recognise the true leader and who was to be anointed.
W.J.H. it is a position that is in God's hands; but in the meantime there are the seventy sons of Gideon available to promote something of Gideon's characteristics in the saints.
J.C. Would you say that Gideon was specially raised up by God in a crisis?
W.J.H. Quite so, and when any crisis is met we revert to mutuality, that is the idea of the seventy. Not one of them aspired to be king. Gideon had said, "I will not rule over you; neither shall my son rule over you." He brought up his sons to accept that attitude, and there is no evidence that any of the seventy aspired to be king; they were quite willing to go contributing their quota for the good of the saints.
F.W. Do you suggest that these seventy sons represent the idea of a spiritual generation that had been brought up under certain nurture?
W.J.H. That is the thought. They were men who were prepared to follow in Gideon's steps, none aspiring to be king.
{54}
Ques. Would you say the thought of brethren and the family of God would maintain one in mutuality?
W.J.H. The household of God is a great protection from special connections and friendships. If we understand the household of God we will not make room in our activities, in our affections, for a special class of friends with whom we keep peculiarly in touch.
A.H. Does not the truth of the body mean that mutuality exists?
W.J.H. The truth of the body is a similar thought to what is developed in Jotham's parable.
A.H. The Colossian position is "love... to all the saints."
F.W. Is there implied any idea of moving back to what was more historical than moving forward on the line of the Spirit, because Shechem is the place to which Abraham first came when he left Mesopotamia. It seemed to be the beginning of things. This matter has Shechem in view. I wondered whether there was a tendency to go back to what was known in the past, and a refusal to move on according to the new generation.
W.J.H. I think that is important, for there is no doubt what tests us greatly is a fresh movement of the work of God. We would naturally like to stay in the one place as in restful conditions, but there is a movement forward, it is the mind of God to have things on a mutual basis, so that for the moment there is no other judge raised up.
F.W. That would have been a movement forward.
W.J.H. Quite so.
J.M. Moses said, "would God that all the Lord's people were prophets."
{55}
W.J.H. He would love to see the prophetic feature developed mutually amongst the saints. He had no idea as Abimelech had of arbitrary control of the brethren.
J.M. Would we gather from this that the mind of God is that the features seen in Gideon are to be extended over a larger number?
W.J.H. Mutuality would check the ambition of Abimelech, and he takes steps to dispose of the seventy, even to killing them all on one stone.
Now perhaps we could look at Jotham as over against Abimelech. He unfolds his parable as disclosing what he, as his true son, had derived from Gideon.
W.K. What is there in the fact that he was the youngest son, and that he hid himself?
W.J.H. It shows how the features of Gideon are still preserved by the overruling of the Lord. He is the youngest son, and he is hidden -- he is not moved by ambition.
Jotham speaks of the trees, having his eye on the state of the people as looking for a king. The Lord intends us, as set together here in a city, to take things up together and work them out, each contributing his part, and if we promote someone to be king, in order to dispose of our exercises, or solve our problems, we open the door to the ambitions of the flesh. But what Jotham has in mind is that in this husbandry that exists, all trees proper to the husbandry will keep their place and continue in what is committed to them. The apostle introduces the thought of the saints in Corinth being God's husbandry as well as His building -- a great thought, as applied to an assembly
{56}
in a city. It is general, but nevertheless it is also local; here in Brisbane God has a husbandry where plants of His planting are growing to yield certain results for Him.
J.M. Abimelech's suggestion that one man reign over them seemed to be plausible; but we see the mind of the Spirit set forth in Jotham's parable.
W.J.H. Quite so. What a conception for every brother and sister here to take into their hearts, that according to the divine thought, they are trees of some particular character planted in God's husbandry.
F.W. Each to fulfil his own function.
W.J.H. That is it. When God plants a garden, His thought is to put in all kinds of serviceable trees, both for beauty and usefulness.
F.W. So that although leadership seems a necessity amongst the saints, and we would thank God for it, yet it is not an objective for the assembly. At the present time the objective for the assembly is mutuality and all together answering to the mind of the Lord.
W.J.H. Quite so. Gift is to bring all forward to a certain level; so, if Paul planted or Apollos watered, it was only that there might be a growth, in the husbandry, of mature trees yielding either beauty or fruitfulness for God.
Rem. The trees of the Lord are full of sap.
W.J.H. They are satisfied -- that is the New Translation. That is what Jotham opens up, the trees of the Lord are satisfied. The olive tree says, as it were, I have no thought whatever of moving from my position in this husbandry as yielding honour to God and to men; I have been planted here for this purpose, to honour
{57}
God and to honour men, that is the service committed to me and I have no intention of leaving it.
A.H. Is that thought carried out in connection with the body? The eye cannot say to the ear, I have no need of thee.
W.J.H. Quite so; but the eye has not the slightest desire to be the ear, the eye is perfectly satisfied to fill its part in the body without being jealous of the ear, the mouth, the feet, or the hands.
F.C. To maintain the senses, each must abide in its position, because it goes on to say, "If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing?"
W.J.H. Quite so. Is there jealousy between the eye and the foot? No one ever heard of such a thing. The olive tree does not live for itself, it lives to yield the olive, from whence comes the oil, typical of spiritual dignity, of that which makes man's face to shine. The olive tree says, I am perfectly satisfied to quietly pursue my service to yield this oil which honours God and man. It is a great thing to see that God has given to every member its own function, so that as discovering what the Lord has particularly fitted us for in regard to His interests, our business is, as satisfied, quietly to pursue that.
W.K. The olive speaks of "my fatness," indicating satisfaction.
W.J.H. Yes; think of the dignity of bringing honour to God; that your presence in this city honours God. Do you want anything better than that? Do you want to be king over the trees, to wave over them with your influence, or are you satisfied? Am I satisfied? I am planted here to honour God.
{58}
J.Th. The enemy attempted to turn the Lord from that path.
W.J.H. Yes, in the temptations. His meat was to do the will of Him that sent Him.
J.C. It says in Corinthians that God has placed the members in the body as it pleased Him. So that everyone has a function to perform in mutuality, and is to recognise that God has put him there to be serviceable to all.
F.W. Is there a kind of leadership in that the olive tree is first? If the olive tree keeps its place it will help each of the others to keep theirs.
W.J.H. Quite so. We know that in the body there are certain members that seem more conspicuous, but then we do not in any way discredit the lesser members, for they are all important.
E.A.M. Would you say that the olive tree was conscious of the place that God had given it?
W.J.H. That is it, and the trees of the Lord are satisfied. If we are trees of the Lord's planting in this city, we are satisfied to pursue quietly what God has given us. An olive tree, a spiritual person, not only honours God, but he honours men. That is a great matter. There are some who assume to be spiritual who are constantly murmuring about others. The olive tree does not do that. He honours God first, but he honours man, he dignifies men with the thoughts of God, and he serves them as honouring them. I do not know anything more distasteful than a murmuring spirit amongst the brethren, and certainly it is a most destructive element.
F.C. What does the fig tree signify?
W.J.H. The fig tree's business is to bring in the
{59}
sweetness and the good fruit. As set in the husbandry, its service is to yield something that will bring sweetness from God's husbandry. Thank God for the fig trees that bring in sweetness amongst the saints.
F.C. There are occasions when a cake of figs is referred to. It would look as though being brought together in that way, perhaps under pressure, yields food. It is alluded to several times in the Old Testament.
W.J.H. Quite so; indeed the Lord went to Bethany, which means "the house of figs." How sweet the love that operated in Mary and Martha and Lazarus, love to Him, and love to one another. This sweetness was evidenced first in hospitality -- "A certain woman named Martha received him into her house." The element of hospitality maintained amongst the saints on a spiritual level yields much sweetness and fruit. And this fig tree says, "Should I leave my sweetness... to wave over the trees?"
J.M. The Lord cursed the fig tree, we read in the Gospels. Does that suggest that He failed to find sweetness among His earthly people?
W.J.H. What He found there was only leaves. He wants more than leaves; He wants fruit.
F.W. Is this feature seen in the pastoral spirit in the saints?
W.J.H. I think so. We have all known what it is to receive from the fig tree sweetness that is very comforting. The Lord looked round on one occasion on everything in the temple, and He went out to Bethany, as if to say, I will find there what I cannot find here.
A.H. The opposite to the spirit of criticism is the healing virtue in the fig, @Isaiah 38: 21.
{60}
W.J.H. Yes, a little genuine hospitality often heals boils.
Ques. Gaius was a good example of hospitality, was he not?
W.J.H. Yes. It is wonderful what a little true brotherly and sisterly intercourse on spiritual lines will do to overcome boils, eruptions from inward corruption. So the fig tree says, I am not going to move from the service the Husbandman has given me.
Then the vine is approached, and answers, "Should I leave my new wine, which cheers God and man, and go to wave over the trees?" What a suggestion that there is in the divine husbandry, growing here, what is to gladden the heart of God and man. What a contrast to the world of brambles that grieves God. It says of the antediluvian world that it grieved God in His heart as He saw the fruits that were produced in men. But the vine says, I am here to make glad the heart of God.
F.W. The New Translation renders it "new wine," as if it were constantly fresh.
W.J.H. Showing it is a living state of things; the husbandry is a living thing. The yield from the vine is first for God, what cheers God, and then what cheers men, instead of sorrow and weeping to our brethren -- instead of being pained when they think of one, their hearts are gladdened. Paul could speak to the Philippians of thanking God for every remembrance of them.
J.M. Do we see in the trees the thought of functioning in a living way, and that is to be maintained now amongst the saints if there is to be mutuality.
W.J.H. That is really the thought, the effectual
{61}
working of each one, and the Lord helps each to carry out his own part, not aspiring to take someone else's.
Ques. Is there the suggestion that these trees have been cultured by God?
W.J.H. Indeed it says, "The husbandman must labour before partaking of the fruits"; and God is working in every city today, as hitherto. Take the visits of the Lord's servants in recent time, to these parts, planting, maybe, or watering -- all is that the husbandry might be fruitful.
F.W. And you cannot get on without the element of joy amongst the saints, not only strength, but joy; so Zechariah says, "Corn shall make the young men flourish, and new wine the maidens."
W.J.H. Do you mean that the subjective side is flourishing amongst the saints by the production of joy? Indeed, I think one can say reverently that God needs it, for He orders that in many of His offerings wine should not be missing; a certain proportion is to be provided in many of them.
A.H. Did not the Lord speak of that, when He spoke of His peace and His joy remaining with His disciples?
W.J.H. Quite so; indeed it would be a very happy subject to meditate on, to see what is presented in these three trees, in all its excellence in Christ.
C.F. Does Jotham suggest the son of the true mother, Abimelech was not, and in that way he could not produce fruit for God.
W.J.H. The mother affects us a great deal. We see it in the mention of Timothy's mother and grandmother, the maternal influence. So the assembly
{62}
here today is to be a true mother that provides influences that will produce such as Jotham.
What follows is the curse of Jotham. Fire comes out of the bramble and consumes the trees, and fire comes out of the trees and consumes the bramble. It is as certain as anything that ambition allowed and operating through special friendships and affinities will end in conflict and bitterness and hatred between the two sections. It always does; God orders it governmentally.
F.W. It is remarkable that he should have uttered this curse from Mount Gerizim, which was the mount of blessing. Apparently he had blessing in view. He says, "Hearken unto me, ...that God may hearken unto you." The way was still open for them to alter their course.
W.J.H. Quite so, if they would hearken. God would hearken to them, and blessing would have flowed from that mountain; but they would not hearken, so the curse came.
F.W. Would you say why Jotham went to Beer after he had uttered his parable?
W.J.H. Beer means a well; he would retire into the reserves that God has in the Spirit to maintain him.
F.W. I was thinking of Shechem as referring to the early history of things. He would show he did not disregard God's ways with His people, but he knew which place to choose when this difficult time arose, in going to Beer, which, as you say, refers to the well -- rather than simply standing in an historic spot like Shechem.
W.J.H. The sense that the well is there is a great
{63}
reserve for faith. "The word that I covenanted with you... and my Spirit, remain among you," @Haggai 2: 5. The word goes back to what was past, but then it says, "The word... and my Spirit, remain among you." In a time of cruel destruction of God's interests among His people through jealousy, faith falls back on the well as the power to continue.
J.Th. It is interesting that he started with the olive tree, speaking of what is spiritual, and he goes to the well, he finishes with it.
W.J.H. The olive tree, no doubt, represents spiritual persons, but the well represents the Spirit Himself, the great source of supply.
One would suggest we recognise the wonderful possibilities here in this city if every brother and sister would quietly pursue their part livingly in divine interests. The potential wealth is more than we realise, provided each takes up and continues his own service, judging ambition, judging the desire for the place of another, but contributing livingly what the Lord has fitted each for.
{64}
BONDMEN OF GOD, OF CHRIST AND OF THE SAINTS
@Romans 6: 17, 18; @2 Corinthians 4: 5; @Philippians 1: 1; @Revelation 1: 1
No doubt we have all been impressed at times with the wide range of relationships in which we stand to God and to Christ, so wide indeed, that God is to be everything. He is to be all in all, and so with Christ Jesus, He is to be everything and in all. In our relations with God we start with that of creatures. God, the blessed Creator, and we are to be a kind of first-fruits of His creatures. Then we are His people and He is our God. We are His flock, and He is the Shepherd. The flock of God is the subject of His care and provision and oversight. Then we are His children and He is our Father. As His children He watches over us and trains us; He protects us; He loves us; He is a Father to us. Then we are His priests, priests of God, ministers of the Lord, and we serve Him in this way. Then we are of His assembly, His senators. What a wonderful range of relationships and positions we stand in to God in all this. Then we are His sons, "sons," it says, "of the living God."
You can see, therefore, how all this, and much more, provides for God being everything. So with Christ, He is everything, as Colossians puts it, He is "everything and in all" to His people. What a range of relationships we stand in to Christ! We are His disciples, He is our Teacher. He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His companions; we are His companions. We are His and we owe everything to Him.
{65}
God has given us to Him. "Behold, I and the children which God has given me." We are also of His assembly. "On this rock," He says, "I will build my assembly." We form part of His body, part of that great company that is called the bride, the Lamb's wife, and we are also His brethren. All this provides, too, for Christ being everything; provides a range for our hearts and minds that is worthy to fill them. Instead of chasing the vanities of the human mind, what a range opens out in all these relationships and positions in which the people of God stand to God and to Christ!
I want to say a few words as to our position in relation to Christ and to God as *bondmen*. The position of bondmen does not weaken in any way all the others, and yet is perfectly true, as one feature of the truth that is to be taken up. We are bondmen of Christ; we are bondmen to God, and I want to commend this to the brethren here as providing a line of exercises that will lead to each, especially the young, being for God and for Christ. By many, Christianity is looked at as optional and subsidiary, but the acceptance of bondmanship means that the things of God and His precious interests are not optional with us, nor subsidiary to other things, and the great corrective to a manner of life that would make them so is the true acceptance of the bondman position.
The young will understand that the position of "bondman" is entirely different from what we mean by the word "servant" today. The claim to render service for forty or forty-four hours per week for certain rewards and then to be perfectly free afterwards is not what Scripture means by being a bondman. The civilised
{66}
world has sought to sweep away the position of slavery in which men own other men. This, of course, has been dreadfully abused, but God retains this position in His system, where it is not abused. I commend that position to every heart as most attractive. It is not one to be evaded, as the slaves of America ran away into Canada to be free, but, as understood rightly, this is what the bondman says, "I love my master... I will not go out free"; I love these bonds that bind me as His property, so that I have not any option, any rights, any liberty for aught but the will of my Master. It may seem to be lowering the standard suitable for the great system of liberty that Christianity is, but you will be in good company if you accept bondmanship.
Our blessed Lord accepted it. Indeed, He has taken it, not simply accepted it, for He who was in the form of God, took a bondman's form. There is no form that the human mind can ever conceive that would correspond with the form of God. It is outside the human range, yet, of the One who was in that form, it says, He "emptied himself, taking a bondman's form." As having in mind to come into this scene, into manhood, He selected the form He would appear in as that of a bondman, not that of a king, though He was born a King. It says, He took a bondman's form and was found in fashion as a man, so that, dear brethren, if we accept the bondman's position we shall be in company with Christ.
And we shall have Moses with us, "the bondman of God," as it says of him in the Revelation; that great prophet was called the bondman of God. And we shall have Mary with us, the mother of the Lord,
{67}
for she accepted the place of being bondmaid, "Be it to me according to thy word." We shall have the aged Simeon, the man granted the secrets of heaven, for He said, "Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go." We shall have John, "his bondman John," he says in the Revelation. He will be with us in that position. We shall have James, the bondman of Jesus Christ; Jude, the bondman of Jesus Christ and the brother of James. Peter, also, and Paul are bondmen. How Paul loved to speak of himself thus. And we shall have the prophets with us for they are all bondmen, the Revelation tells us that. And we shall have the angels with us, for the angel says, consequent on Christ taking that form, "I am thy fellow-bondman, and the fellow-bondman of thy brethren, the prophets," so that, dear brethren, while the position may be one that the world would condemn, it is one in which we shall find excellent company, where all the notables of heaven are found. I want to refer to these four scriptures in this connection, first of our acceptance of being bondmen to righteousness, then of our being "your bondmen for Jesus' sake," then a word as to the bondmen of Christ, and finally of bondmen of God, and what that leads to. We start with Romans, because Romans is the beginning for us, the great preparatory epistle for what lies beyond.
The preparation for having part livingly in the local assembly of Corinthians, in the true heavenly Christianity of Philippians, and for the spiritual and heavenly side of the universal assembly of Ephesians, all lies in Romans. Romans prepares the individual for the great thoughts of God. We have there the
{68}
thought of having been bondman to sin. We all know about that, for the great system of sin set up in this world holds men in slavery. We have been in it, like the children of Israel in Egypt, bond-slaves there to the great lawless system of the world. What slavery it is, without option! What bonds hold men there! The mighty power of money is in that world, the bond that holds many a man in its grip, so that he is not free to do as he would. The bond of pleasure, the bond, maybe, of dress, of fashion; all these things and many others are chains that Satan uses to bind his slaves. We have all had part in it; we were all bondmen to sin, but the apostle says, "God be thanked." How we do thank Him that He has taken us out of the slavery of the world's system and liberated us. But what for? To become the bond-men of righteousness.
Righteousness is not an optional or subsidiary matter but a compulsory matter, a position in which we are bound. We have no liberty to be unrighteous. Righteousness demands of us as bondmen to it. Let us not think we can travel further in spiritual things if we do not accept its claims. Righteousness in our relationships, in our occupations, in our associations, is a matter of such importance that we, as Christians, stand in the position of bondmen to righteousness. One would earnestly commend that especially to the young men, and young sisters too, that everything begins there, and if we move away from that position we can go no further spiritually. I have no doubt that what the Lord is raising at the present time in this city has to do with the compulsory character of righteousness -- the rights of God, that we are His
{69}
bondmen and bondmen to righteousness. The Lord would help us to accept that position in every sphere of life, as the great initial position that leads to much beyond.
I want to say a word now about what is connected with the Corinthian position, the local assembly. The apostle spent much time in Corinth. He refers to his preaching there, and views the saints in Corinth in such a light that he says of himself and Timothy, "ourselves, your bondmen for Jesus' sake." I wonder whether we are prepared to accept that without option. That in relation to God's people, God's husbandry in this world, we are "your bond-men." For the sake of what Jesus would have from this husbandry and this building and what God would have, Paul says "your bondmen." I would earnestly commend that to all here. If it was good for the great apostle, our apostle, who was not one whit behind the chiefest apostle, let it suffice us.
We shall never serve the saints in this, or any city, unless we clothe them with the thoughts of God. You may say, You do not know what is underneath here. Things are not worse here than at Corinth, yet the apostle clothes the Corinthian saints with God's thoughts of them. He speaks of them as God's assembly in that city; he says, "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God?" and again later, he says, "Ye are body of Christ," and as he clothes the saints with these great heavenly thoughts, viewing them as God takes account of them in relation to His work he says, "Ourselves, your bondmen," our life is to serve you without option or desire to be otherwise. He says of the saints at Corinth, "all things are yours;
{70}
whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas... all are yours." That is how he looked on the saints.
Again he says, "Ye are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men." Wherever Paul went, he spoke well of the Corinthians; he did not discredit them, though he knew there were things that troubled him, his business was not to discredit the Corinthians, but they were his letter, known and read of all men. He boasted of them to other gatherings, rejoicing in the great work of God in that city. We cannot serve God's people if we do not honour them with divine thoughts and appreciate the work of God that is there, and take up, as to ourselves, the position of bondmen to them. You cannot rightly serve any one you do not honour and so the great apostle says to the Corinthian assembly, "ourselves, your bondmen for Jesus' sake." I beg all to open their hearts to this, that the thing that controls them here is to serve that which is so precious to Christ and to God, instead of making our occupations, or our homes, or our health the controlling factor and making divine interests optional and subordinate, alas! as some do, to the great loss of their own souls as well as to the brethren.
The line on which the Lord will bless all of us, and bless His people too, is that of bondmen to the saints; so that we understand that our presence, our support and our contributions to what will build up God's people are not optional. We are not to do merely what we naturally care to, or go away for weekends if we care to. Paul says, "ourselves, your bondmen for Jesus' sake." That is what is wanted, that every brother and sister should take up this bondman position,
{71}
not only to Christ and to God, but to the saints; "your bondmen for Jesus' sake," and the Lord will bless such.
I will come in a moment to what the bondmen *get*, but the work of God prospers where there are bondmen. Think, for example, of the one whom the Lord has recently taken to Himself from this city. What an example he was! One who made divine interests first and everything else subordinate. I beg the young men to have such as a model before them, so that, come what may, the Lord's interests stand as the controlling object; home and business and health and other things being subsidiary.
Now refer to Philippians. How fitting that the apostle should open as he does, for he is going to speak of the One who was in the form of God taking a bondman's form, and becoming obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. The very first words recorded from the lips of Jesus were, "did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" "*I must*," that is the bondman's position. It is not a question of what one would like to do personally, the bondman *must* attend to the business committed to him. So the Lord says, "I must work the works of him that has sent me while it is day!" The apostle has this before him as inspired to write this wonderful epistle and so he says, "Paul and Timotheus, bondmen of Jesus Christ."
It is not, of course, compulsion by mere arbitrary power, but it is compulsion, by the mighty constraint of divine love. God speaks of "the cords of love," and "the bands of a man." They were so bound round the heart of Paul that they made him the bondman
{72}
of Jesus Christ, ready to do His will whatever the cost, ready to go wherever He sent him, ready for a path of suffering if the Lord called him to it. And He did, for He said, "I will shew him how great things he must suffer for my name's sake."
The apostle *takes up* this position in relation to Christ, that he is His bondman. What a solution to many a question in our spiritual histories, if we just quietly, humbly and happily accept the bondman's position. It makes life simple in so far as it is true that our business is to carry out the behest of our Master who has bought us. It says, "Ye are not your own, ...ye are bought with a price." Do we accept that we are the property of the Lord, that we are to glorify God in our body and our spirit, which are His? It will lead us into a path of wonderful blessing, and fruitfulness, and joy, if we accept it.
Finally in the Revelation we have the thought of bondmen of God. The "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him to show to his bondmen what must shortly take place, and he signified it, sending by his angel to his bondman John." The great undoing of the lawless principle that Satan has introduced at the outset is found in the acceptance of the place of bondmen to God. *Our* business *His* will, as the Lord said, "My meat is to do the will of him that sent me." If we accept this, it leads to another position. The Lord said to His own, "I call you no longer bondmen... I have called you friends." Let us see that such are bondmen first. The Lord says, I do not call you any longer bondmen, you have been and are bondmen, I have bound you to Myself, but if I have bondmen, I will give them another position,
{73}
I will call them friends. There is no other way to be amongst the friends of Christ or the friends of God except by the way of being bondmen.
How perfectly that is seen in Jesus, to whom in this world as in bondman form, the Father told everything. So with the angels, they are His bondmen and the great mystery is understood by them. "God... manifest in flesh, ...seen of angels." The great mystery of the incarnation is seen by the angels, the fellow-bondmen of the prophets. So with Abraham, to whom God appears, Abraham taking the position of being God's servant. "For this cause," he says, "thou hast appeared to thy servant," and then God says, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" and He calls him the friend of God -- a glorious title!
So with Moses, the bondman of God, God spoke to him face to face as a man speaks to his friend. If He finds a bondman, He will make him His friend and tell him His secrets. He showed the pattern of all the figurative representation of the things in the heavens to His friend Moses. The bondmaid Mary has the greatest secret ever disclosed to a human heart conveyed to her, the incoming of the blessed Son of God; the bondman Simeon has revealed to him that he will not taste death until he sees the Lord's Christ; the bondman John must know all that is coming, the great working out and fruition of divine thoughts, culminating in the new heavens and new earth; the bondman Paul receives from the Lord. How much he received! "I received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you." He received the supper, he received the truth of the rapture, he is given an insight into all the counsels of God, what
{74}
God purposed in Himself before the ages of time; all is disclosed to His bondman Paul.
So it is today, however feeble the measure, those who have an understanding of what God is doing, to whom divine things are communicated, are bondmen elevated to the nearness of friends. Those who accept the position of obligation without option, to the Lord and to God and to the saints, and to righteousness, are selected for the secrets of heaven. I commend to every heart here, that in the measure in which you take up the position of bondman, you will find that the Lord will say to you, I call you no longer bondmen, I call you friends. The Lord will do nothing but He tells His servants the prophets. A wonderful statement! Everything that the Lord will do He tells somebody; He tells His bondmen, He makes them His friends. Think of twenty, thirty, or fifty bondmen in Brisbane, bound to righteousness, bound to the saints for service, bound to Christ, bound to God for His will, enjoying the secrets of heaven. What fruitfulness, what increase would follow for God! How it would lead to the husbandry yielding more for God and to the building being seen in its true character, as the temple of God, in Brisbane.
One desires to commend this great thought, exemplified in all its perfection in Christ. First we accept, without option, in every sphere the position of bondmen to righteousness, secondly as linked with the saints, we say, "your bondmen for Jesus' sake." We do not put our health first, our homes first, or our money first. The controlling thing of our hearts and lives is that we are "bondmen for Jesus' sake." Then, dear brethren, we are the bondmen of Jesus Christ,
{75}
the One who took a bondman's form. "It is sufficient," says the Lord, "for the disciple that he should become as his teacher, and the bondman as his lord." It is sufficient! Do we want to be different from Christ, different from Paul, different from Moses, different from the angels of heaven? Would we do as we like, go where we like, spend our time as we like? The Lord would help us to say, It is sufficient, that we want nothing better. It satisfied Paul and it satisfied Moses. It satisfied Mary and it satisfied the aged Simeon to his last day.
May the Lord help us to be satisfied thus, and we will find we shall understand the secrets of heaven. The mind of God is disclosed to His friends who, first of all, are bondmen. May the Lord encourage us all to take it up in reality and faith, as seeing it in Christ personally, and delighting in it.
{76}
POWER
@Judges 13:1-5; @Judges 16: 6-31
I had in mind to say a few words as to power. No one would deny the great weakness that marks Christians, in which we all share, and yet it is wonderful that the strongest man of Scripture is found in this book of Judges in a day such as ours. The public position was that there was no king in Israel and the people did evil in the sight of the Lord. Israel's position was one of captivity to enemies, departure from God, unfaithfulness, brokenness, abject weakness, and yet, in these conditions there arises the strongest man of Scripture. I think it might help us in our weakness to look a little at the source of power.
The Psalmist says, that twice he had heard that power belonged to God. We are always in the presence of one character of His power. The visible things disclose to every man His eternal power and Godhead. Men boast in the power that they have accumulated through knowledge, seen in what they make, and one admits that man has learnt how to do remarkable things, but you would not connect eternal power with man. Take any great leader of science. Where is his power in the presence of death? What abject weakness is evident. Where is all his intelligence? What can he do now? There is nothing calculated to make a man feel weak like death. All have to bow to its mighty force sooner or later, but the sun still shines, the stars still proceed on their courses, the rain still falls, the grass still
{77}
grows, maintained by eternal power. There is no diminishing of the power of God the Creator.
Think of the power that has been emitted from the sun over these thousands of years, and yet, as far as we can measure, it is undiminished. It is well for us who are to be a kind of first-fruits of His creatures to think constantly of God as the possessor of eternal power, who not only brought the universe into existence, but upholds it by the word of His power. Men would like to believe the universe upholds itself, but Scripture says, that it is upheld by the word of Christ's power. The universe is supported by the eternal power of God. How well, in these days of boasted human ability, to keep our eye on the visible things that disclose the eternal power of God.
Then the apostle indicates a further expression of God's power, and that is the cross. He says, "the preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is the power of God." What a contrast to creation. You can understand that the sun, that mighty orb, evidences His eternal power, but think of the cross being His power. The preaching of the cross is to us who are saved, the power of God. The mighty power of God finds expression in the cross of Christ. You say, What can it do? What does this power perform through the preaching of the cross? Christ crucified exposes by divine power the true character of this world with all its deceptiveness, as under the influence of the deceiver. God has a power that lays bare the world's true character, and that power is the cross. The whole system of this world and its rulers are so
{78}
against God that, when the Lord of glory, the blessed Administrator of every true glory in the universe came, the princes of the world, its great leaders, crucified Him.
God uses the light of the cross to disclose to us the world in its true character, even as He uses the sun to dispel the darkness of the night, and show things in their true character. But the power of God in the cross does not stop there. Christ crucified is the power that God uses to draw troubled hearts to Himself. As the sun in the heavens draws, by its influence, the whole solar system, so Christ crucified is the power of God to draw our hearts out of this world to Himself. As the Lord said, "I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me." This he said, signifying what death He would die, not only that He would die, but by *what* death He would die. We are all accustomed by necessity to the thought of death and also of burial, but crucifixion is something additional. It is Christ lifted up, not only to expose the world in its true character, but to disclose what God is towards us, so that we might be attracted, as the Lord says, "I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me."
Another source of power is the blessed Spirit of God here. The Lord said that His own were to tarry in Jerusalem till they were endued with power from on high. The Spirit of God is the source of heavenly power for the saints of this period. God has given us a spirit of power. The "demonstration of the Spirit," the apostle says, "and power," so that, on the divine side, God would strengthen us by
{79}
calling our hearts' attention to Himself, to Christ and to the Spirit as the great sources of true power for the believer. On the other hand, Samson brings before us how power can be known by us experimentally, and it was that, I particularly wanted to touch on tonight.
In selecting Samson, God goes right back to his beginning, a most important matter for parents, for God has His eye on those He would use even before their birth. He speaks to Manoah's wife by His Angel and warns her that the son that is to be born is not to have a razor on his head, but first of all, that she is to refrain from strong drink and from eating anything unclean. That is her side, and the matter is confirmed by a second appearing to Manoah and he is also warned that this is to be maintained. We understand what these things mean. They represent spiritually that the parent is not to come under the control of the joys of earth as dominating her. The joy in relation to God's people being delivered from their enemies and serving God, makes her superior to the control of the joys of earth. Then she is to be careful that she eats nothing unclean, Scripture carefully helping, in that day, to make clear what is clean and what is not clean. That was the mother's side.
I would speak to mothers and to parents generally. If our hearts are finding their joy and their portion in earthly things, however right, and especially if we are feeding upon what is unclean, are our children likely to be mighty men of God? Do you not see that they must be influenced by what we are? If our joys are the wine of this life, if our souls dip
{80}
into the unclean things that man feeds upon, is it to be wondered at that our children are weak spiritually? If our minds are feeding upon the unclean literature of the day, if the joys of earth are really that for which we live, do we need to wonder why it is that our children are so feeble spiritually? Inevitably they are going to be affected by what they see in us; it cannot be otherwise. God knows it cannot be otherwise, so that He begins even before Samson is born, so that he should be formed typically under the influence of one who knows something of the joys of heaven, and who loves what is pure. Those of us who are parents, but have lost our children in this world, must go back and see that either the wine of earthly joy or unclean things have been given place in our souls, and the effect is seen in our children.
Then the next thing is that when the child appears, it is repeated twice that no razor must come on his head. That from the day of his birth what speaks of subjection must be found with him, for the growth of long hair in Scripture is simply that; it represents the feminine side, the outward position of subjection. So Manoah's wife is exhorted to see, from the outset, from the birth of Samson, that the element of subjection is maintained; that no razor removes it. Can we expect mighty men of God if our children are allowed to be insubject from the outset? Of course we cannot. The maintenance in the children, from birth, of the principle of subjection is the first step in them towards being mighty men here for God. You see that expressed in all its blessed perfection in Christ. Not only was He subject to God from His
{81}
birth, "I was cast upon thee," He says, but in His relationships here as Man, as it says, He went down to Nazareth and was subject to us parents. Never did subjection disappear from His blessed path. His locks were black and bushy, @Song of Songs 5: 11, right to the last day of His sojourn here.
Now this is the secret of the strength of Samson, the man who could take a young lion and rend it in two as a kid; the man who could take a jaw bone of an ass and slay a thousand Philistines; the man who could take the gates of the city and doors, and carry them up the hill before Hebron. The secret of his strength, in the typical teaching of it, is that he never had a razor on his head. The great feature of subjection was set forth typically in Samson and was to be maintained by him. If we desire our children to be men of God, let the principle of subjection begin with their birth. If we want sisters strong in the service of the Lord, it will be as subjection to man as head is maintained. If we want men who are strong to serve God, it is as subjection in every right sphere is maintained, whether to employers, to government, or to the rule that God maintains amongst His people, or to the Lord Himself. The secret of strength lies in that which appears to be weak, namely, subjection. Feminine glory is to have long hair, a symbol of subjection, and that principle, accepted in every sphere of life to which it applies, is the secret of strength on our side. In the measure in which we maintain it, we will find that there are no powers, no bonds that men and the world can make that will be able to bind us. If we are bound successfully it is because
{82}
we have departed from the principle of subjection.
Samson makes clear that they can test this out. They could bring their new withs that never were dried, fresh efforts and movements of man to bind God's people, but they break like tow. They may bring their ropes, stronger still, to capture this man, but they snap like thread. They may fasten his locks to a beam, but as long as he has his locks, the beam will give way. The truth is, dear brethren, there is no means known to the modern world -- the Philistine world -- that can successfully bind God's people while they maintain the great principle of subjection, first to the Lord above all, and then in every sphere to which it properly belongs. Let that principle be maintained, and all the withs, the ropes and the beams that the world can produce are but thread to God's people.
But be assured that the Philistine element is unrelenting in its efforts to bring into bondage those who maintain the principle of subjection. Delilah was after those eleven hundred silver pieces. She had no love for Samson. She was after the spoil that she would get for herself, till at last he disclosed the great secret of his strength. That which speaks of subjection is that which is outwardly weak, especially in a man, for it is a shame for a man to have long hair. Subjection is outwardly a position of weakness, but the true acceptance of that position is the great secret of the mighty power of Samson. But, alas! what is in his heart is ultimately laid bare to a Philistine world. "He told her all his heart." These holy features of subjection are not to be paraded. Where they exist they are the secret
{83}
of the soul. But by Samson they are laid bare to the Philistines and in a few moments his strength is gone and he wist it not. He is bound now, his two eyes are taken out, he grinds in the prison house, he becomes the sport of the Philistine world!
I speak to the dear young men and women whom Satan is seeking to decoy into a Philistine world. If you give up the position of subjection to the Lord or in any other sphere to which it belongs, you will lose both your eyes. What was once so bright and clear to you will be lost to your sight, and darkness will supervene. You may think that you will find liberty in a wider sphere in the world, but you will be in cruel bondage; you will grind in the prison house of this world and you will be the sport of a world that hates Christ. I appeal to you to look at Samson, that mighty man before whom previously no Philistine could stand. A thousand had earlier sought to take him and could not. He becomes the sport of his enemies, as many a Christian, who has gone into the world, becomes positively the sport of the world, not really one of them, but a subject of their sport and mockery.
But Samson's hair began to grow again. He began typically to come back in self-judgment to this great principle of subjection to God. With the return of the hair there was a return of some of the power that was once his. How we thank God for that, especially those of us who are older, whether we look at it individually or in relation to the present position of God's people. How many of us as individuals have known the loss of true might, true
{84}
strength, by insubjection in some form or other, but have also known the blessedness of a return of strength, at least in measure, as that principle began to be accepted again. We are at this very moment enjoying the same thing together among God's people. The church has turned away from allegiance to Christ and what a sport to the world it has become. What mockery, what darkness, what bondage, is in the public position of the professing church! But in recent times the principle of subjection to Christ as the church's Head has begun to appear, and to those who accept it the whole world is coming down.
With the return of the principle of subjection in the soul of Samson, the Philistine house crashes, and it is going to crash in the great religious Philistine world as the principle of subjection to Christ is re-established in the hearts of God's people. I think we can truly say that the hair is beginning to grow again. The acceptance of our true allegiance and subjection to Christ is coming into many a heart amongst the saints, and with its coming falls the mighty power of this world over God's people.
Well, I would call attention to these great matters. First that we should see in God, and in Christ and in the Holy Spirit, the great sources of true power compared with which the might of the whole world is as nothing. The whole force of this world, however great it may appear, is small and weak compared with the mighty power of divine Persons. On the other hand, the strength for God's people to face enemies, to face even the roaring lion maybe, lies in subjection to the Lord. We learn there are no withs,
{85}
there are no ropes and there are no beams that can bring God's people into bondage if we are subject. But if we allow a razor on our heads so that the hair of our Nazariteship disappears, what a spectacle we become!
May the Lord help us to see this great subjective side of power, the acceptance of subjection in every sphere. May the Lord help us to learn these lessons.
{86}
THE FIRST DAY AND THE LAST DAY
@Genesis 1: 1-3; @John 20: 1-18; @Acts 20: 6, 7; @John 6:30-40, @John 6:44, @John 6:53-55
I have in mind to call attention to the importance of the first day and the last day, both clearly relating to time. It is wonderful that God should make time His servant, as, indeed, He uses everything. "For all are thy servants," a wonderful word in @Psalm 119, indicating how great God is. Ultimately everything is His servant, whether willingly or unwillingly, and that gives great rest to our hearts. Time especially is His servant, God dividing time into sections.
It is clear that the great divisions of time are determined from heaven. Man has nothing to do with it except to submit to them. None can alter a day. The day is settled from heaven, it cannot be lengthened, it cannot be shortened, and what we speak of as a day, twenty-four hours, is divided into day and night by heaven. And the month is determined by heaven -- the lunar month. Man has nothing to say thereto, for it is fixed by God. And the year is fixed by God, the complete cycle of seasons is also determined from heaven. God is pleased to use time to teach us many things. Finally He uses a thousand years as one of His days to display His great triumph, for the coming world will display the triumph of good over evil, and when time has served its purpose it passes away. Our lives individually are made up of days and years. That is the great division of life of each individual on earth.
{87}
"The days," it says, "of our years are three score years and ten." But the life of God's people as His assembly is divided into weeks, and it was with this in mind I wanted to say a word or two particularly about the first day of the week.
First of all I want to say a word about the *first* day. Its bearing is that it leads and gives character to the days that follow it. That is the scriptural thought of first, illustrated in the way the apostle speaks of Christ. As typified by Melchisedec He is "first... King of righteousness" and then "King of peace." That is to say, He is to be known first as supreme in righteousness, the great King of righteousness. Men would like to alter that and put peace first, but you cannot have peace according to God without righteousness. So it is with the Lord's selection of the apostles. It says, "First, Peter." Peter is the apostle that is to lead and give character to all, both by divine selection and by what he represents in his ministry.
So the first day is *that day in relation to other days*. It is not an isolated day, but as the first day it stands at the head of the other days. Now you can see that must be true if you look at what is said of the first day in @Genesis 1. On that day it says, "God said, Let there be light." Previously there was a condition of darkness, "And the earth," it says, "was waste and empty." How long that period lasted is not disclosed to men, but the truth is that the earth was waste and empty. What a thought that is, an empty, barren earth, and darkness pervading all. But on the first day, "God said, Let there be light. And there was light." What follows on the other
{88}
days could not be effective without the first day. The light must be there for the work of God to proceed, for God would not work in darkness, because He is light and in Him is no darkness at all. So that if He is operating, He brings in light and then divides the light from the darkness and names them. He calls the light, day, and He calls darkness, night. So it says, The light was good, and then "the evening and the morning were the first day."
All can *see* what follows in the separation of the waters on the earth from the waters above, by the firmament; in the bringing in of dry land and making it fruitful, and finally, animals and then man appearing on the scene. How essential must be the first day, that there must be light and that the light and the darkness must be separated and named, or all else could not proceed to the great end that God had in view.
Now this is still true of His work in every one of us. Our first day, the first day of His operations in us, is that He commands light to shine out of darkness and He causes the light and the darkness to be separated and named. I believe every true conversion is like that, divine light enters the heart that hitherto has been barren and empty, and what follows normally is that the soul begins to distinguish between light and darkness, and is able to say of the light, This is day; and of the darkness, This is night. There is evening and there is morning, a first day. Then every exercise that follows is to be governed by that. Our life and our spiritual history are to be in the light that God has commanded, and in
{89}
the maintenance of the difference between day and night, by naming both.
Every true Christian had a first day like that. Let me ask you, Is it a unit that stands away back in the past by itself and your other days different, with no relation to the first? or has your subsequent history been in that light that once shone into your soul? And have you maintained the calling of light, Day, and of darkness, Night? Or are you mixing these things, so that the first day of your soul is simply an isolated unit in your history? That is not God's thought. His thought is that the first day should lead every day, as controlling and influencing them. What fruitfulness, what pleasure to God follows when that is the case, so that, at the end, God looks on everything that He has made, "and, behold," it says, "it was very good."
I inquire of young hearts here who have had a beginning, a first day, who once divided light from darkness, who once were able to say, This is light, this is day; that is darkness, that is night, and the two were separated in your soul. What about your second day, and your third? Does every other day follow your first one? That is God's order, His thought. If there is to be productivity -- increase -- for His pleasure, that day must ever be the first day, when the light of heaven shone into your heart and when you were able to definitely separate light from darkness and name both.
One has been struck with the great power there is in naming things. God helps people who do so. Many are detained and diverted because they will not look things in the face and give them a name.
{90}
Read the first of Genesis. God keeps on naming things and the first thing to be named is light, called day, and the second, darkness, called night. To mix these two will, as far as you are concerned, destroy the great end in view, of being here, fruitful for God. What I have said as to that indicates what is in my mind -- that the first day stands out as the great *head* of the days. It is so in creation, and it is so in our souls as we are maintained true to divine thoughts.
Now I would like to say a word or two about "the first day of the week," which belongs to the assembly, God's people as set together. The bearing of a week has relation to God's people together, and I want to apply what I have said in the same way, that every week we live, as of God's assembly together, is headed by the first day. The twentieth chapter of John introduces what comes to light on the first day of the week. Luke does not speak of that, but of the day after the sabbath. But John speaks of the first day of the week, the beginning of the week, the assembly period. The One who went into death was not there on the first day of the week -- He was risen. That is the thing. God's people now stand related to Christ, not as here on earth, but as a living Man out of death. The Object of God's people, the Object of their hearts, is not living on earth, nor is He in the grave -- the sepulchre is empty -- He is a living Man beyond death. The assembly's Object is not on the earth, nor in death.
The assembly's week begins with that. The week for all our hearts, as God's people, begins with this
{91}
great discovery, that our Object is not on the earth, but is beyond death and is to be known to us there, as He made Himself known to Mary. Mary represents what I am saying. She discovers an empty tomb and she finds, on the first day of the week, that the great Object of her heart discloses Himself to her as in resurrection, outside man's world and earthly things and all that makes up human life. He is beyond all that, but He is living and able to put Himself in touch with His people in a real and spiritual way. Is that a theory *to* us, dear brethren? Is it something that we assent to in a mere nominal way, or do we know it experimentally, that the Lord Jesus, the Head of His body, the assembly, can put Himself livingly in touch with His own as their great Object? He does it on the first day of the week, and then He discloses to Mary, this great lover of His, that the light and the sweetness of heavenly relationships are to be known on that day.
He says, "go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God." And Mary came and told these things to the disciples. She told them that on this wonderful first day, He is to be known as out of death, in touch with His own, and He would convey to them the blessedness of heavenly relationships. That is the day that is to head our week. The consciousness that He is not here, that He has passed out of this scene, not now in the grave, but still living, characterises this day. Our Object is a living Man, who is in touch with us and conveys to our hearts the sweetness of heavenly relationships. He said, "I ascend," that indicated the heavenly character of
{92}
the relationships to be known on the first day. Not only resurrection but ascension.
What about the second day? What about the third day? What about every other day of the week of God's people here? Is this the day that gives character to our week? That our Object is not on the earth. We must have to do with the earth, but our Object is not here. That is as true on Monday as it was on the first day; it is as true for the last day, the seventh day, as it was on the first, that our Object is not here, but we belong to His assembly where He is known, and we have tasted the sweetness of eternal and heavenly relationships. The Lord intends that to put a colour on the rest of the week. How different everything would look on Monday, if the first day stood in relation to the next day, and the next, and the next, even to the last. Alas! with many of us, I fear the first day is only a unit, just one day, not the first day really, but one day, the second day not attached to it, not linked with it. So that on the second day our objects are seen to be really on the earth and earthly relationships absorb us.
Now I would like to pass on to the twentieth chapter of the Acts. There we have the first day of the week connected with the breaking of the bread. It says "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread." Every heart, I trust, says, Yes, I do that; I come together with the saints on the first day to break bread. Who that loves Christ would be missing? "This do," He says, "in remembrance of me." What lover would be voluntarily missing when He is to be remembered? How
{93}
worthy He is to be remembered, for we owe everything to Him! But what I want to ask, dear brethren, is this, Is the day on which you break bread *the first day of the week*, or is it a detached day, a day that just comes round once a week but has no bearing on the rest of the week? If so, it is not the first day to you. The Spirit of God records that it was on the first day of the week they assembled to break bread. The saints in that city, Troas, began their week by this day. It was not a detached, isolated day to them; it was the start of their week. It characterised their week. Every single day that followed was controlled by it to the very last day.
What was it that they enjoyed on the first day that was so great that it could mark the whole week, that it could give a tone, a character to Monday and to Saturday and Saturday afternoon and every evening? What was it that was so wonderful that the whole week of Gods people in Troas was coloured and characterised by the first day? The Lord was known to them on that day. He was known, it says, in the breaking of bread. How is He known to them? "This is my body, which is given for you." That precious body, including every member of it, was laid down, devoted to His own. "Take, eat," says the Lord, "this is my body." Feed upon this wondrous food -- eat this, that your heart might be strengthened by this bread -- My body given for you. He is known to us thus.
The blessed One who came into the body that was prepared for Him used His body in devoted love to His own, even to its surrender in death, and the saints, on the first day of the week, eat this bread.
{94}
They not only maintain the memorial, but they eat the bread. It is food to their affections. What for? That strengthened, they might pursue the week as characterised by the food they have eaten, for that is the meaning of food. Food determines our character and the saints together on the first day of the week eat this bread. The point in Matthew particularly is the eating, it is food for the hearts of the saints, so that strengthened by it, the week might be characterised by the first day.
Let me ask each one of us as of the assembly in this city, does Monday reflect anything of the first day? You say, How can it be? The bread we have eaten on the first day speaks of Christ's body given for us. What are we doing with our body on the second day? Oh, says someone, we must take great care of it lest our health gives way. That is not what was learnt on the first day. What was learnt on the first day? "This is my body, which is given for you," even to death, so that with that day leading we hold our body for sacrifice, for devotedness to the saints, in measure as Christ did.
Then come the evenings; the prayer meeting sees us present, also the reading on Wednesday, maybe Thursday, and the care of God's beloved people who need shepherding will be remembered also. Oh, you say, there is little time, and our strength will give out. "This is my body, which is given for you," is the food of the first day. It is not a day by itself, every day takes character from that day. Oh, says somebody, we will not live long. That is not our object. The Lord was taken away in the midst of His days. How are we holding our bodies?
{95}
Perhaps the greatest evidence of selfishness lies in the use of our bodies. The Spirit of God says, They came together on the first day of the week to break bread. The whole week should be marked by what flows from the first day, the Lord's body given in devoted love to His people, the reflection of that in the beloved saints is that their body is held for service and sacrifice to the saints, or else the first day is only an isolated day. "We ought to lay down our lives for the brethren."
So the next thing is, "This is my blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many," "Drink ye all of it." The Lord says on the first day, Let your heart be stimulated with joy as you drink into the love that moved Me to lay down My life for you, to secure you for the pleasure of God and His holy service. "For many." One loves the thought of the many. God looked down at one time to see if there were *any*. It says, There was not even one. But the Lord says, "This is my blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many," "Drink ye all of it." Let our hearts expand in the joy of the love that would give up His life to have you for God, for His service, for His praise, to be amongst the thousands of them that love Him. That is the joy of the first day, that you have a place amongst the thousands of those who minister to God, that love Him. Is the second day like that?
What about the last day of the week? The first day speaks to us of a life that is laid down for ever, for the life that is in the blood is surrendered for ever. You say, If I follow that line I will not live long here. The blessed Lord surrendered the life of flesh and
{96}
blood for ever, to have you amongst the many, to have you as one of those instruments to praise withal. What are we doing with our lives as the week pursues its course? Are we letting go a little of our lives? The Lord in the cup says, I have given up my life. This cup is the new covenant in My blood which is shed for many. As the week passes, are we holding our life with a firm hand, lest a little of it should go? The apostle John says, "We ought to lay down our lives for the brethren," and the apostle Paul says, "I die daily." "Bearing about," he says, "in the body the dying of Jesus." Paul says "dying," not the death of Jesus, but the dying. We miss the joy and blessedness of Christianity if our week is not headed by the first day, but if it is headed by the first day, with what appetite, with what intense longings we approach the first day again, that our hearts might be strengthened afresh by the bread and the joy of our souls stimulated by the cup. There is sometimes a lack of desire for the supper, which indicates that the first day of the week has not really been first, hence there is little hunger and thirst, because the energy and joy has not been expended in the week that followed. I commend it to every heart here of those who break bread, that the divine thought is that the first day stands in relation to each day that follows.
I would say a word or two about the "last day" of @John 6. What a thought is the last day, the final day, the day when all that has been secured in time, comes to light and is manifest. What joy to think that nothing that God has wrought in His people throughout the ages will be missing in the
{97}
last day. The last day will be the assembling day, the day of manifestation, the day when God displays His work. That is the day that counts in this connection. Where will we be when the last day comes? Will there be anything worthy of having a place in the last day? So the Lord indicates what marks those who will appear then.
The Lord speaks of those the Father has given Him. "All that the Father giveth me," He says, "I will raise him up at the last day." What a view of the work of God, that we belong to those who are given to Christ! Think of the Father giving us to Him! Would He give Him a poor, unworthy gift? The Lord delighted in those who were given to Him. He says in another place, "thine they were, and thou gavest them me." What a view to take of the saints. They are the gift of the Father to Christ. What a privilege to serve them faithfully. "All that the Father giveth me," the Lord says. Every true believer represents a gift from the Father to Christ. He values them so much that when the last day comes He will raise them up, not one will be missing. They will be there because of the price He puts on them as the Father's gift. Then the Lord says, "this is the will of him that has sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day." That is another feature of the work of God. "Every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him." What a sight to see the Son, to see the blessed One in manhood who declares God, who makes God known!
The whole physical universe teaches us something
{98}
about God as to His eternal power, but the Son is the Declarer of God in grace and life, and every eye that has seen Him and believes on Him (not *did* believe, but is *characterised* by belief, whatever adversity comes, whether loss or sickness or death, such still believe on the Son and in the disclosure of the heart of God in Him) -- every such person shall have life eternal. The Lord so delights in such that He says, "I will raise him up at the last day." Such are so valuable to Christ that He will see they are not missing then, for they have seen Him and believed on Him here.
Then we have a further word from the Lord. "No man can come to me," He says, "except the Father which hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day." Now we have another view of the work of God. Christ is presented as the great Magnet of the moral universe, and the Father is drawing the hearts of men to Christ. In another place the Lord is doing the drawing, "I will draw all," the blessed One who was lifted up. But in this passage the Father is drawing. In His gracious activities of love and goodness He is engaged drawing men to Christ. Jesus saw Nathanael coming to Him. What made him come? The Father drew him. How He valued Nathanael, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!" The Lord says of everyone that has been thus drawn, "I will raise him up at the last day." He so values such that when the last day comes each will be there; the Lord will see to that.
Then, finally as to this view-point, the Lord says, "Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood,
{99}
hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day." The Lord is looking again at another feature that He puts great price on. How the Lord delights in those who eat His flesh and drink His blood. He has His eye on them and when the last day comes they will be there. You will notice He says, "I will raise him up" in each of these cases. They said to Christ, "This is a hard saying; who can hear it?" One cannot speak of it now, but just to say that eating His flesh and drinking His blood is the appropriation of His death here. The expression "flesh and blood" signifies the condition of life that He took, in which He died; it was the termination of the life of flesh and blood. You say, I do not see much food and joy in that. No, dear brethren, if earthly things are our all, there is nothing to attract in such meat and drink. If all I want is my business, my money, my home, and the pleasures and comforts of this life, of course I am not attracted by the termination in death of the condition of life that the Lord Jesus took; but if I find my food and joy in His death, it is because I have discovered other objects. First I have discovered in His death that which satisfies my heart, the blessed disclosure of His love, of divine love, and then there is a world beyond flesh and blood. Do we believe it? There is a world beyond flesh and blood, a vast world, "that world, and the resurrection," and the eating His flesh and drinking His blood is the acceptance of death in view of that world and the resurrection. The Lord says of any who so accept death, that He will see that he has part in the last day. What will give us a place in the last day is the thing that
{100}
matters. We may miss much that is going on in the present world, but that is all coming to an end for ever, but when the last day comes, the Lord is going to raise up all that the Father has given Him, all that have seen the Son and believed on Him, all that have been drawn to Him by the Father, all who have fed upon His precious death as having another world in view. The Lord says, I will see they have a place then.
I thought it might be well to commend to you these two thoughts, the first day giving character to the rest of the days, whether it be our first day as Christians, or whether it be the first day of the week for God's people. On the other hand, to pursue that which will give us a place in the last day, so that the Lord will raise us up as valuing us. The Lord puts a value on what He raises up for the last day. May the Lord help us in these two matters.
