{#GOD'S THOUGHTS FOR THE ASSEMBLY}
{5}
THE ASSEMBLY - GOD'S HUSBANDRY
@Romans 16: 25-27; @1 Corinthians 1: 1-3; @1 Corinthians 3
W.J.H. It might be serviceable to consider the thoughts of God for His people in any city or place, so that, while recognising the general ruin in a public way, our hearts should be revived to hold the thoughts of God definitely, and be committed to them in every city or place where God has set us. The epistle to the Corinthians is particularly in my mind as addressed to God's people in one city; and while conditions there were very serious, evil having got in among the saints, the Apostle did not lower the level of divine thoughts for His people. Indeed, he recovers them by making clear to them what are God's thoughts for His saints in Corinth, that they might adjust their behaviour and their associations to the thoughts of God. One hopes that God will help us to seize these great thoughts as being set here in Sydney or in any other place in which
{6}
we may be. The Apostle speaks of the saints at Corinth as the assembly of God. Then he speaks of them as God's husbandry. "Ye," he says, "are God's husbandry." And then he also says, "Know ye not that ye are temple of God." And finally, which we shall come to, please God, later on, he tells them that "Ye are the body of Christ." Those are the four things that have come before me as helpful to us to consider as bearing on the saints in every locality. Those are the thoughts that we might take up a little together and see how far we are conforming ourselves to them and seizing their great import for us.
E.E. Referring to Romans, is it so, that before God unfolds to us His thoughts concerning the assembly. He establishes us in His thoughts concerning Christ? So the Apostle says, "According to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ."
W.J.H. I think that is exactly how it works, for through the glad tidings God secures each one of us individually for Himself, and as the glad tidings are enjoyed -- Christ being the subject of them -- material is prepared in each individual soul to pass into the assembly locally, into the divine husbandry, into the temple of God, and to be consciously one of the members
{7}
of the body of Christ. Romans prepares for all that.
J.S.D. So that the glad tidings ought to be looked at rather as a presentation of Christ than as simply a matter of relief out of our difficult conditions.
W.J.H. Quite so. Because Christ is the Head of the assembly. Christ is the tree of life in the midst of the paradise of God, and Christ is the Ark of the Covenant in the temple, and the assembly is Christ's body. So that Christ is to be the Centre of everything that is secured for God in a locality, or generally. This great thought is introduced to each heart through the Gospel.
E.E. One feels as we approach the subject, that it is *so* great, we can only look at it as Christ has His place in our hearts, lest by any reason we place any creature, however blest in the thoughts of God, above Christ.
W.J.H. Hence Romans is of the greatest importance, and, I think, is not heeded sufficiently by us, especially by the young in their early Christian life. Romans makes clear to begin with, "All have sinned and come short of the glory of God." That is to say, we cannot, in virtue of anything in anyone of us, have any part in that which is for the glory of God. And these four things are for His glory; that
{8}
is where His glory lies, but every one of us has come short of His glory.
D.J.M. Are these four things embraced in the revelation of the mystery?
W.J.H. I think that Romans having prepared living material in the teaching of it in the soul, brings you to the thought of the mystery -- to what God is doing secretly here on earth. It is just like the early part of Exodus -- the preparation of material for the tabernacle -- and without the exercises of Romans we are all deficient in taking our part in the assembly, and in the husbandry, and the temple, and the body.
E.E. So that the unfolding of the tabernacle system begins with the Ark.
W.J.H. Quite so. And so in Romans, once the platform is clear that everyone comes short, and is therefore discarded, as after the flesh, then the Apostle brings in the Ark. "Whom God has set forth the Mercy Seat" -- the Mercy Seat being part of the Ark -- the great centre of God's thoughts.
Ques. Would that be the foundation laid at Corinth -- Jesus Christ and Him crucified -- in contrast to the cultured Corinthians?
W.J.H. Quite so, the crucifixion bringing to an end in ignominy what man is in the flesh, as having no part in these great things. I feel,
{9}
and the older brethren I am sure will agree, that if we should encourage, through these meetings, the young brothers and sisters to commit themselves to the thoughts of God as being the greatest thoughts in the universe, and wholeheartedly to find their part in them -- even if one brother or one sister did it -- the possibilities are only known by the Lord. The crying need at the moment, in this city, and indeed generally, is for the young men to come forward and take their part. The Lord is removing many of our elder brethren, and alas, others are dropping out, and there are hundreds of young -- young brothers and sisters who, one fears, may not have seized the immensity and glory and surpassing greatness of that to which they are committed, so that they give their all to it.
H.S.E. Would you say that what Joshua and Caleb did should be expressed in all the children of Israel as *wholly* following the Lord?
W.J.H. Quite so. Such a sense of the wealth and the blessedness of God's thoughts in His land filled their vision that nothing else had power over them.
N.B.S. The greatness of these things is indicated in Romans where it speaks of "the commandment of the Eternal God."
W.J.H. Showing we are linked up thus with
{10}
what is for eternity, and it makes living for pleasure, for lust, for business, for natural joys, appear very small or worthless. Let the light and grandeur of these thoughts come into our hearts, that we are part of God's assembly in Sydney, we are part of God's husbandry, where He is growing plants for His paradise, and we are part of God's temple, and we belong to the body of Christ here. If our younger brethren could seize these things, I believe that there would spring up in their hearts a desire for this to be *all* to us here. Not a formal coming to meetings in an outward recognition of what is right, but an apprehension that this is *everything* -- that there is nothing on earth like this; these things are by the commandment of the Eternal God.
O.B.B. How would these things manifest themselves in relation to the young sisters?
W.J.H. "I commend to you Phoebe our sister, which is a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea." She served the Lord's interests in Cenchrea, where she lived. That was her life and occupation. She may have done other things to provide things honest in the sight of all men, but her occupation was that of a servant of the assembly in Cenchrea. And that is open to the young people, and it is immense,
{11}
and one longs to see sisters take it up as being the only thing to live for.
A.C. Would the secret of this lie in the sense of sovereign mercy? When we were hopeless and helpless God has come in and taken us up.
W.J.H. Paul the minister of the assembly and the planter in the husbandry and the layer of the foundation of the temple was filled to his dying day with the profound sense of the mercy that took him up, and, says "Paul the aged," "I obtained mercy." That is to be retained, for @Romans 1 and 2 make clear that we have all forfeited any place in that in which the glory of God is, and if we have part in it, it is entirely on the ground of mercy.
E.H.G. So that, referring to Romans, the ground has been cleared in the death of Christ and the revelation of the mystery, but there is still required the obedience of faith to make these things living. It is all very well to have the ground cleared, but according to the commandment of God we are to make these things living.
W.J.H. Quite so. This dispensation, by divine wisdom, is a dispensation in faith, and what we see on the principle of faith we must obey, and we do see that God has His assembly in Sydney as elsewhere, and we do see that He has a husbandry on the principle of faith, and
{12}
it commands our attention; it commands our all. The Lord would not have us have these things just as a side line to our lives, but *we are here for these very things*.
E.E. So now that the groundwork is cleared and the position established as to the place the Lord has, and we ourselves vessels of mercy, I would suggest that you proceed with these positive thoughts, for we cannot obey if we do not know them.
W.J.H. Before we do so, it might be well to say that Satan is particularly active to destroy morally young men and women in their early days so that they can have little or no public part in these great matters, and I would entreat the young men to face that by way of their lusts, by way of this world and its pleasures and by way of the love of money and unrighteousness, the enemy is especially seeking to make it impossible for the next generation to stand for God here, because of having been publicly discredited in their early days. If the young men would allow God's great thoughts in their hearts, and allow these to *govern* their outlook, the Lord would safeguard them for His assembly. But the devil would have them so dishonoured that they can afterwards have little or no public part in what is of God. This matter is generally settled in youth. Our part in
{13}
what is of God is largely determined in our early days.
C.E.J. The will of God for the Thessalonians was for their sanctification.
W.J.H. The Thessalonians were young believers just recently converted, and the Apostle was concerned that they should be protected and maintained practically in sanctification.
N.B.S. Do you think that we need help in seeing that our life here is not an object or end in itself, but a time of education for what is eternal?
W.J.H. Quite so. And a time also to stand by, and have a part in God's thoughts here, which are eternal. These thoughts I have referred to belong to eternity; and what a terrible thing for a young man if from 15 to 30, he turns away to the world and becomes dishonoured publicly so that he loses the greatest opportunity he could ever have in life of being able to stand up with the saints publicly, as standing by divine thoughts.
J.S.D. Would the thought be seen in Timothy in a parallel way -- "Keep thyself pure." He was about to take up his part in the testimony, and the Apostle saw the necessity of the mind being maintained in purity.
W.J.H. Quite so, and also he says to Timothy, a young man, "Flee youthful lusts." Flee
{14}
them! Do not trifle with them, but flee them; because if they got control Timothy would not be able to take up his part in the service of God.
J.P. Your exercise at the beginning was that each one of us breaking bread should be deeply exercised that we are really established in regard to Romans. The fact that we are breaking bread does not say that we are established in the truth of what we have in Romans.
W.J.H. Romans would confirm to the end of the journey the sense of mercy. Romans exalts Christ as the One through whom God has approached us, and then He becomes the *one* Man of @Romans 5. Every other man fades out. And then in the seventh chapter we are married to Him -- a most important matter. We have only one husband -- one object for our hearts -- "That ye may be married to another." That is not the assembly there; that is each Christian in this room married to Christ as the sole object of his heart. And then we learn the mighty power of the Spirit of God to lead us into the thoughts of God and enable us to live for Him; and then our bodies are surrendered to divine will and we are ready to take up our part in the local assembly.
A.C. Do you suggest that the first few years
{15}
of a young man or woman pretty well determine their Christian pathway?
W.J.H. I am sure that up to about 30 Satan marshals every force he possesses to make it impossible for each one of us to stand here for God publicly. We do not cease to be Christians, but he would so discredit us publicly that we cannot stand by these great thoughts of God, locally or generally. There are hundreds of young people growing up to take the place of the older ones, but how will they fill it?
J.S.D. So that while in the goodness of God our past history is forgiven, in the government of God we have to accept certain consequences.
W.J.H. Quite so, and how far we can be available in a public way depends on whether Satan has discredited us to such an extent that we are so weakened that our part must be little.
G.H.W. Does Satan provide a counter to these things you have mentioned -- the husbandry, the temple, and so on?
W.J.H. The whole world's system is his answer to secure the heart in relation to the assembly of the wicked, in relation to what is growing here from the seeds he has planted, and in relation to that building in which he is honoured. The Lord would impress us all with a sense of the greatness of the assembly of God in
{16}
Sydney. If anyone of us belonged to the Legislative Assembly of this country it would dominate our lives, business, and home, and everything else would subordinate itself to the fact that we were members of the Legislative Assembly, the greatest body legislatively in this State. God has an assembly in this city, and each one of us, as having the Spirit, is part of it. Is it not worthy that it should command us?
Ques. What is God's great object in having an assembly in the city?
W.J.H. That in a place of satanic wisdom He has a vessel of divine wisdom. The all-various wisdom of God is in the assembly as a whole, and reflected and expressed in each local assembly.
E.E. That is to say, that whilst there is immense blessing for us in being connected with the assembly, there is a greater thought still, to see what God has in it. I was thinking that it is well to let this light break in, thus forming a standard by which we can judge it and stand apart from all contrary to it.
W.J.H. I am part of God's assembly here. Does that not put everything into its place If that is apprehended my business will not dominate me; my home and family life will not be the object of my life; certainly the pleasures of the world are not going to be my object. I
{17}
belong to God's assembly, the vessel of divine wisdom in this city.
N.B.S. The thought of God's will and calling would give us some sense of the dignity and greatness of the assembly.
W.J.H. Quite so. It is as Romans takes effect that we are fitted to be in the vessel of wisdom. As we love Christ, as we are married to Him we become wisdom's children. The Lord indicates that wisdom has her children -- they justify wisdom and they love much.
A.C. Would not the assembly of God stand over in contrast to the assembly of the wicked, in @Psalm 22?
W.J.H. So that in the local assembly there is a vessel where the wisdom of heaven is. Christ is the true Joseph that "binds the princes at His pleasure, and teaches His senators wisdom." We are in the position of senators; as members of the assembly we are in the senate of God, and Christ is available as the Teacher of heavenly wisdom, so that we cannot allow that there is no means of settlement of matters -- it would be denial of the assembly.
E.E. I was going to ask a question as to what would flow as a result of having wisdom from God in the assembly. What would be for God in it?
{18}
W.J.H. One effect is that what is evil would not go on year after year without settlement, if we were in the truth that Christ is the Head of the assembly, and He teaches His senators wisdom. We would bring matters to the assembly for divine judgment; and who could stand against that?
J.S.D. Is the wisdom of the assembly of the wicked seen in that they crucified the Lord at Calvary?
W.J.H. They took counsel against the Lord, and against His anointed. It was the counsel of the wisdom of hell that put Christ there, but in God's assembly Christ is enthroned; He is supreme.
E.H.G. So that the assembly is not only marked by wisdom, but by authority and power?
W.J.H. Vested there by the One Who is Head, Who has authority to bind His princes. The Lord has authority to restrict princes; and then He teaches His senators wisdom.
E.E. Does the thought of testimony come into this in this way, for God is demonstrating in this present evil day the principles of government that are going to control the world to come?
W.J.H. Indeed. He is going to have glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations
{19}
of the age and ages. That is reflected in the local assembly in so far as assembly features are with us, and I think we must take it to heart that where there are difficulties protracted over months and years, it is because we are not recognising the assembly as the vessel of divine wisdom here.
D.J.M. Is it the anointed vessel at Corinth in view of testimony?
W.J.H. Quite so. "So also is the Christ", is said of this wonderful vessel.
E.E. In relation to what you have said, have we not to confess that in being slow to adjust these matters which exist in our local gatherings, it is because we have been too sensible of the weakness that is amongst us and not of the wisdom available to us?
W.J.H. And then, alas, often the wisdom from beneath comes in -- man's will and self-seeking and deception practised. These things are a challenge to God's assembly, but if the Lord has recovered us to the truth of the assembly, there is a means of settlement, matters being judged according to heaven.
G.H.W. The sense of the Lord's presence could not be realised if these things were allowed to go on.
W.J.H. The Lord says "I am with you while you are with Me." That is a most
{20}
important matter. The Lord is not with us just because we are formally meeting in certain rooms: The Lord says "I am with you while you are with Me."
A.C. At Corinth there were mixed conditions, and the Apostle speaks of the Corinthians as carnal.
W.J.H. Hence the importance for us to let divine thoughts come into our minds; that is the way of divine adjustment. If we are part of God's assembly, then the wisdom of the world and the wisdom of Satan are to be excluded, and divine and heavenly wisdom are to be there, and there to be used.
A.C. The thought is that Christ is the wisdom of God, and in drawing from Him as Head there is a solution to every matter.
W.J.H. This Epistle speaks of that: "Who of God is made unto us wisdom." Christ is available to the assembly for wisdom. And if things are brought into the assembly, the wisdom of Christ is there as a means of settlement.
E.H.G. Every company is marked by weakness; there is no perfect company. But it is as assembly conditions predominate, the authority of the Lord comes in.
W.J.H. Whatever the weakness and the departure generally the Lord would have us cling
{21}
to His thoughts and not lower the standard at all.
E.E. I think that is very great. Whatever may mark us in our responsible pathway, it never dims what we are called to.
W.J.H. Quite so. So that, however weak we may be, man's will, man's pride, and principles of deception, are not to be tolerated where the truth of the assembly is; and the Lord will be there in power to support us in refusing these things.
J.S.D. However conscious we are of being weak we always, through grace, can say we have a little strength, and the Lord will support that.
W.J.H. I feel that if each one of us here decided today that we would cling to God's thoughts for His people, the Lord would help us.
W.W.W. Does the assembly begin with the confession of the Lord, and is it maintained on that?
W.J.H. You mean the Apostle speaks of the assembly of God at Corinth and to all that in every place call on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, both their Lord and ours?
W.W.W. I was thinking of @Matthew 16 -- Peter's confession, against which the gates of hell could not prevail.
{22}
W.J.H. That is more than His place as Lord, it is His Person that is involved there, and what is constructed on the glory of the Person of Christ is impregnable and going through to eternity. We can stand by *that*, whoever goes, and whatever goes.
N.B.S. So that the assembly of God is a wonderfully dignified thought compared with man's puny efforts. If we get the sense that we belong to God's assembly, it would give us another object for our lives while the Lord leaves us here.
W.J.H. The crying need of all, but specially of the young, is that this is a matter that concerns our lives here. Christ, of course, is our object, but He is in heaven, but there is in the place where I live, be it Sydney or elsewhere, the assembly of God, and that is worthy of my all, and not merely the fragments that I may have after all else is served. Not just the bit left over when I have gratified myself. It is worthy of everything, and the Lord will help the young men if they will come forward and commit themselves entirely to the Lord's interests here.
Ques. Is that what is meant when it speaks of "our glory" -- that it should be the object of our lives?
W.J.H. We have a part in what is glorious
{23}
as having part in the assembly, and the weakness is that these things are only abstract things with some of us -- only theories.
E.E. In that connection one would like to draw attention to Ruth, who seems to indicate great encouragement to us, and I would suggest that our beloved young saints might look at Ruth, and compare that which was presented to her and see the effect upon her with the limited testimony that she had, and then compare this with our day when such light is being presented to the assembly.
W.J.H. By pursuing what is presented she reaches God, and that is what is here. Corinthians brings in this, "God is among you," and if we give ourselves to God's thoughts we shall find we shall reach a point where we have a conscious sense that God is there and His glory is present.
Ques. Is the lack of apprehension of the greatness of these thoughts due to lack of faith?
W.J.H. I think the main difficulty with us in our early days, and no doubt it has still to be faced, is that we have two objects for our hearts. @Romans 7 provides that we should be married to Another, and the Lord will not help us if we say to Him "Baali," but He wants us to say "Ishi." Baali means "lord." The Lord
{24}
wants us to say "Ishi," which means "husband." If we are honest we may have to say that we have another object beside Him, and therefore do not reach the assembly consciously. Indeed, Israel served the Baalim, thus having several lords -- as we may be in danger of having also.
Rem. The things of sight and sense are much more close to us than these things which are unseen, and that is the reason that they are not apprehended in their fulness.
W.J.H. Before the woman in @John 4 is bound in her affections to Him as her Ishi, the Lord says to her, "Go, call thy husband" -- bring him into My presence; I want to see him. She tries to hide from Him the fact that she has got an object that is illegal by saying she has no husband. Everyone has a husband; every believer has some object that controls his heart, and the Lord says, "If you will bring that object into My presence, then I will go on with the question of giving you living water that will satisfy you for ever."
G.H.W. Would Priscilla and Aquila be the reverse of what you speak of? They had one object.
W.J.H. They had one object, and we cannot take our part in the assembly here in Sydney and be in the enjoyment of it until we
{25}
face @Romans 7, that we are married to Him individually. I would like to ask each one of us: Can we really say we are married to Him? We are as truly bound to Him as our only object as a wife is to her husband.
J.P. Would @Romans 7 fit in peculiarly with your thought in connection with the husbandry?
W.J.H. What is in view is fruit for God, which brings you to the thought of husbandry. You are married to Another that you might bring forth fruit for God. The need of the Lord's own heart and for the testimony is that we say "Ishi," and not "Baali." That is to say, that He alone is our object; it is a matter of a husband's position, and any husband would reject the idea of being one of several. It would be hateful to him; and the Lord will not be one of many. His conflict with us often is because we give Him one part of our hearts, and then we have other objects.
E.E. And yet, pursuing @John 4, to indicate how gentle and how wise the Lord is He says, in effect: "If you have another object, well, bring it to Me and compare it with what you find in My presence."
W.J.H. What comes out when the Lord says, "Go, call thy husband and come hither," is that the object she has is illegal and immoral; and if any other object than Christ is controlling
{26}
our hearts it is illegal and immoral. We cannot get the gain of the living water until we face this, and thus we see why some of the young, especially, are not satisfied. They are dipping into one thing and another for their hearts, because they are not satisfied. The reason for this is they have not brought the object of their hearts into the Lord's presence to let Him see it.
Rem. The living water will not spring up on that line.
W.J.H. The woman said, "Give me this water," and the Lord said, "Call your husband, and come hither." Bring your husband into My presence and then I will go on with the matter of the living water.
Rem. Morally, the first husband is dead, so that we are free to be married to another.
W.J.H. The death of Christ terminates any claim over us of anything but Christ. We are free to be married to Him. It is legal to be married to Him: indeed it is the only right position.
D.J.M. If we are to understand what is now true in mystery, does it call for diligent exercise? Proverbs says, "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, but the honour of kings to search it out."
W.J.H. He takes the beggar from the dunghill
{27}
and sets him among his princes; and makes them to inherit thrones of glory as being part of the assembly. Kings search out what God does.
E.H. Does the recognition of the one husband involve the judging of everything inconsistent with that one, and the recognition of one Lord and one Master?
W.J.H. How can we consciously be in the assembly where Christ is supreme, if we have other lords? If we really love Him do we want more than one? It is not a question of trying to force anything on anybody, but *if Christ is worthy of anything He is worthy of everything*. Do we want two lords? We will never realise our part in the assembly if we want other lords.
E.E. In the Epistle to the Ephesians where He is Head over all things to the assembly, what an honoured place she has. It says in the same Epistle, "He loved the assembly and gave Himself for it."
W.J.H. To all eternity there is to be One "The marriage of the Lamb has come, and His wife has made herself ready." She is seen as a bride adorned for her husband. Not, Baali there, but Ishi to all eternity.
W.H.F. Are you suggesting that calling upon the name of the Lord Jesus Christ is the result of having accepted Him as our only Lord?
{28}
W.J.H. In this Epistle the Apostle says, "Unto us there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, by Whom are all things, and we by Him." *One Lord*. I submit that it is a matter that needs to be faced more than anything else, whether we are calling Jesus "Baali" -- one of the Baals. There are many of them in Scripture, and He is one to some, alas! but it is obnoxious to Him. He wants us to call Him "Ishi," -- *my* husband -- that would bring us to the assembly.
Ques. Is that seen in Mary at the sepulchre?
W.J.H. Quite so. Rabboni -- my teacher, or *my* Lord -- *MINE* whoever else owns Him.
H.S.H. I was wondering whether you would say that Jacob, in burying all the idols and going up to Bethel, had that before him?
W.J.H. Very good. He was conscious that if he came to Bethel there would be only one God there. That is what Corinthians brings us to -- only "One God, the Father ... . one Lord. Jesus Christ." But that is a matter for our affections and not mere duty.
N.B.S. Peter reached that in @John 21, when the Lord proved him.
W.J.H. Quite so.
A.C. Would you help us, a little on the Temple character?
W.J.H. I think we had better leave that now. Perhaps we could have a little on the
{29}
husbandry first, then the temple, then the body. So that we should just touch a little on the next feature -- "Ye," referring to the saints at Corinth, "are God's husbandry." A most affecting suggestion, that they were the soil God operated in, to grow what would be for His pleasure. Think of all the saints in Orange, Canberra or Sydney; according to the divine thought, they are the soil that the great Husbandman is ploughing, is watering, is planting in, and thus securing the harvest for Himself.
Ques. Is that what the Apostle had in mind, in Philippians, that "Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether by life or by death"?
W.J.H. What an excellent plant in the divine husbandry! The only thing that he cared for, whether he lived or whether he died, was that Christ might be greater to the hearts of others. Not that He could be greater personally, but that He might be magnified, that is, appear greater through Paul's living or through Paul's dying. If we had one hundred such trees in this city, whose only object was to make Christ greater, there would be much indeed for God.
Ques. Would you say that there would be no failure in this regard? It is God's husbandry, and God's care, so that the result must be growth -- there must be fruit?
{30}
W.J.H. On the divine side, of course, there could be no failure; but there is the enemy, the devil, and he gets in and he plants. The Lord said, "An enemy has done this." Malice, hypocrisy, envy, and evil speaking, are plants all brought in by the devil and put into the soil, and they have to be pulled up.
E.E. Is not this thought made attractive to us, when we see that the Lord occupied this place when He was here? "For He shall grow up before Him as a tender Plant, and as a Root out of a dry ground," @Isaiah 53.
W.J.H. And He says, "I am the true vine, and My Father is the Husbandman." My Father is the Husbandman, receiving from that vine what made His heart continually glad. But now, here in Sydney, God has a husbandry, and it is in the hearts of the saints, and He plants seeds through His servants. He causes the rain to come down in refreshment; He sends the ploughers to plough the soil; but He sends some to pluck up what would be obnoxious to Him, and choke everything, so that there might be, in this city and every city, His husbandry.
N.B.S. I am sure it would rejoice the heart of every lover of God to realise more that God gives the increase, and the increase is for God, and it must go back to Him for His pleasure.
W.J.H. The thing we want to see is that we
{31}
are a part of this. What is boating and shooting and spending our time in sport, and all that makes up this world, if we get into our souls that we are God's husbandry? We belong to God's husbandry, where He is growing plants that are for His Paradise in Heaven; growing for His satisfaction.
E.H.G. Is this what the Lord had in mind when He spoke the parable of the Sower going forth to sow, and the seed fell into stony ground?
W.J.H. That parable shows us how the enemy is watching to see that no harvest is secured for God; and when the seed is sown, he would take it away, because there is wonderful power in seed. The power of life is in the seed, and if it gets into our hearts, it is bound to grow, if it is not choked by something else; hence the importance of good seed, and the good seed is the Word of God. That is, God's thoughts are the seed from which everything comes.
H.G. In regard to the assembly, we were speaking much of faith; in regard to the husbandry, would this be on the line of a subjective state?
W.J.H. It is what the husbandman would secure for His own satisfaction, and that is in great variety. In God's plantation there is a
{32}
wonderful range of things that He is growing. It is worthy of giving our all to.
J.S.D. Is the thought of husbandry to secure at the present time all these features so pleasurable to God and to Christ?
W.J.H. Quite so. And they are so varied. If we look over the Scriptures, what suggestions there are as to what God grows in His husbandry -- barley and wheat, vines, and olives, figs, pomegranates, and many other things. All are growing where He has a husbandry, and all speak of Christ.
Ques. Is it that God not only finds delight in the fruit of His work, but God's delight is in the work itself?
W.J.H. That is suggested initially, in that God planted a garden. It says, "The Lord God planted a garden." What for? To have the joy of it, and He saw His own workmanship in various forms, every tree that is pleasant to the eyes and good for food growing there.
E.E. The parable that has been referred to ends with what the Lord described as "an honest and good heart." I was wondering if that feature should be with us in connection with husbandry.
W.J.H. Indeed, all things begin with the individual. If I am going to be in the assembly as the vessel of divine wisdom, it comes by way
{33}
of being one of wisdom's children. Wisdom's children justify Christ. They all love Christ, and never cease kissing Him. Then, if I am going to be in God's husbandry, my heart is to be honest and good, the soil is thus prepared. That brings me to the collective thing -- to God's husbandry in a city.
Ques. Would that be seen in what is said here, "Ye are God's husbandry -- God's building"?
W.J.H. That is the next thing it leads up to, God's building. God's husbandry is a distinct feature and most attractive, and we can understand that the Devil will get in if he can. If there is divine husbandry in Sydney, we can expect Satan, the adversary, to sow seeds which have their origin in hell, seeking to lodge them in the hearts of the saints, so that there should be no harvest for God.
E.H. Job refers to the rain; it says it comes for mercy, it says it comes for correction, but it says it comes for His land.
W.J.H. The ministry that brings before us what marked the beginning, and the ministry that brings before us what God secures at the end, are like the early and latter rains, and both rains are falling.
N.B.S. The thoughts of God are presented in a wonderfully attractive way. You were speaking
{34}
of the husband -- that attracts our hearts. In the husbandry, there is the thought of plants growing up, the word of God is made living by the power of the Holy Spirit. If we get a touch of that, it also will be attractive to us.
W.J.H. Quite so. This husbandry would eclipse all other gardens and all other plantations. God has a husbandry in this city, and we are plants in it.
N.B.S. We do not want to have the beauty of it marred by natural features coming in.
Rem. I was thinking of Ezra, who set his heart to learn the law of Jehovah and then to teach it. Teaching was at the water gate.
W.J.H. A very important matter -- to learn the law and then to do it and then to teach it. Rightly doing, always precedes teaching. If we are not doing anything, do not let us attempt to teach it.
D.J.M. Would the prayer of Moses, the man of God, have this in view? It says, "Let the beauty of Jehovah be upon us and establish Thou the work of our hands."
W.J.H. That is very good. You go into a divine husbandry and you see the beauty of the Lord in every plant. In the olive, spirituality; in the fig, sweetness; and in the pomegranate, unity in fruitfulness; in the lily, purity; and so on. God has a husbandry here, and He is
{35}
attending to it; the labours of so many of His servants the last two or three years, show that. He is attending to His husbandry. He is ploughing, planting, watering through them, and exercising us, that weeds might be rooted up and refused; but it is all that He might have increase for Himself.
H.S.H. James says, "The husbandman has long patience, waiting for the precious fruit of the earth"; the fruit is precious to God.
W.J.H. Because every fig, and every seed in the pomegranate, and every flower of the lily is descriptive of Christ, and God has long patience to secure this. We can truly say the husbandman has long patience to secure the fruit for Himself.
J.S.D. What was it that was hindering the Corinthians? He speaks of them as babes, as though there was not growth going on.
W.J.H. One of the biggest hindrances in God's husbandry is the bramble. Its existence is due to the evil one. The bramble wants to be king. The olive says, "I will not be king." The vine says, "I will not be king." The fig says, "I will not be king." The root of many local troubles is that some bramble desires to be king. (@Judges 9)
{36}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD
@1 Corinthians 3: 9-23
W.J.H. I thought to speak a little together of God's building as finding expression in the local assembly; another of the great thoughts of God, for He would have His building in every city and town where His people are, as well as His husbandry. He would have a building that is *HIS* standing over against the constructions of men and of Satan, all of which are in view of the exaltation of man and display of Satanic wisdom and glory. The Lord would help us to embrace these thoughts as worked out practically in the locality where we are. The tendency with many of us, I fear, is to hold them abstractly only, and as applicable to the whole assembly, but not to see that God works them out in a living way, in the locality where we live. It is true that all these thoughts find their complete expression in the assembly as a whole, but *they are worked out where we are*, and no brother or sister can profit fully by the universal thought, unless he is prepared to face the working of them out locally in a local setting.
E.E. Will you say a few words as to what is the thought of God's building? Is it a completed
{37}
thing, or is it something in construction?
W.J.H. Both thoughts are here in this chapter. There is the idea of the building in process, and we are each to see how we build -- what material we put in; but there is also the thought that "Ye are temple of God." Not that you are becoming such, but that you are, so that both views are right and applicable at the present time.
J.S.D. How does the thought of God's building, as presented here, link with the thought in Ephesians where you get "All the building fitly framed together increases"?
W.J.H. That looks on to the assembly as the temple in its universal setting, including all the saints from Pentecost till the Lord comes. It will then be seen that God has, during this period, built a temple for Himself, and it is growing at the present time, but it is equally true that there is a temple here in Sydney that is God's, and the more we embrace that, and are governed by it, the more we will contribute to it, and get the gain of it.
N.B.S. In Ephesians, it is the Spirit's work that is in view, is it not? Here it is a question of what *we* are building.
W.J.H. Quite so. Hence responsibility attaches here to those who build, as to materials brought in.
{38}
A.C. What is the difference between the two expressions "the assembly" and "the temple"?
W.J.H. The great thought of the assembly is that it is the vessel of divine wisdom. Any matter can find a settlement morally in the assembly, because it is the vessel of God's wisdom; but the temple is, I understand, the place where the light of God shines, where divine glory is expressed, and where holiness is maintained, whether it be in the whole assembly, or in the local assembly -- these thoughts are true of both.
D.J.M. "Ye are temple of God." Is that characteristic?
W.J.H. Yes. It is not exactly "the" temple of God, as the complete thing. But, "Ye are temple of God." That is, it is a feature corresponding with the whole temple seen in a local company.
N.B.S. Would you distinguish for us a little more the difference between the building and the temple. The building was under construction.
W.J.H. I thought the bearing of "Ye are God's building" is that there is something in course of construction where His people are in any town or place, but it is also true that they are the temple of God, and the thought proper to the temple is available to the saints locally anywhere.
{39}
Ques. Would you say the local idea is that it is something the saints can partake in?
W.J.H. It is the opportunity God gives to work out His thoughts, and give them actual expression, rather than that they should be held abstractly only. Hence the importance of all of us taking our part in what is local. Some brothers seem to be very happy in relation to what is general, and move about freely, but are lacking when what is local is involved, and are not prepared to take their part locally. But the local position is to work out livingly the great principles that are proper to the assembly universally.
E.E. I think that is important. Is the house of God a little different from the building of God?
W.J.H. Yes, I think so. The thought of the house of God is that it is where God dwells, and where His character is known and expressed. But the temple emphasises holiness and glory particularly.
E.E. I was wondering if the idea of God's building did not bring the Word of God into a public setting. It is God's building in testimony.
W.J.H. Quite so. How well, therefore, for young hearts present to let this thought into their souls, that here in Sydney, God has His
{40}
building, therefore, is there anything better than to be connected with it? Satan has his building, and the world has its building, but God has His, and am I going to make His building a subsidiary matter!
A.C. I thought, in that way, it would emphasise the greatness of the Spirit. It says here, "Do ye not know that ye are temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwells in you?" (@1 Corinthians 3: 16). It is the greatness of the temple -- the Holy Spirit dwelling in the saints.
W.J.H. Which is a very great matter to recognise -- God's Spirit, Who is God Himself, particularly as active in discernment. The seven spirits of God, the seven lamps, and the seven eyes are all connected with the activities of God thus.
J.S.D. Are we all builders, or is it a matter of option?
W.J.H. It is a matter of responsibility to see how we build, showing that all have a responsibility in relation to it, and what we build is largely what we are ourselves.
N.B.S. It says, "The work of each shall be made manifest," suggesting that there is some work of some kind by every one of us.
W.J.H. Very good.
Ques. Does the temple suggest God dwelling amongst His people?
{41}
W.J.H. That is particularly the thought of the house of God -- that it is a dwelling place for God, but the Spirit of God dwelling in the temple would assert the glory of God, and maintain holiness. We rejoice that there is that here in this city that will assert the glory of God. Every one in His temple says "Glory." That is glory to God, not to anyone else, and in His temple holiness is maintained.
Ques. Would you say that the divine idea is that men should be able to take account of that?
W.J.H. Yes, the temple is magnificent. When you think of a temple, you do not think of a tent. The tabernacle was a tent, and was not intended to convey the thought of magnificence, but nearness; but as to the temple -- David said the house that was to be built must be exceedingly magnifical, and it can only be magnificent as it is holy.
W.P. Would you say that the temple is a complete thought, and what the saints are building is in view of coming to completion in accord with it?
W.J.H. Yes, I think that is right. You have the thought that "Ye are temple of God," but then, there is the present construction going on in the light of that. This does not alter the fact that "Ye are temple of God."
{42}
Rem. That was said even to the Corinthians.
W.J.H. It was to correct unholiness, and also the tendency to glorify man, "reigning as kings," as they did.
J.S.D. In regard to the building, I was wondering whether each one of us is not more or less unconsciously building either on lines which are in keeping with Christ, or on other lines -- natural or even worse -- which will have to be tested by fire. We are not always conscious of this, I feel.
W.J.H. That is very important -- that to some extent we are all contributing to the building, and the apostle says, "Love builds up." Knowledge puffs up. God's building is not added to by what is puffed tip, it is substantial. Love builds up, and the activities of love are constructional. Activities of selfishness and sectionalism, gathering persons round oneself, would be destructive, but the activities of love are constructive.
Ques. Would the building, in that respect, have some connection with the foundation The apostle seems to dwell a good deal on the foundation.
W.J.H. The foundation determines the kind of material suitable for the structure. It is another kind of Man -- Jesus Christ. A lowly
{43}
blessed Man, but One Whom God has anointed, as distinguishing Him, and He is the foundation of God's building. If we bring in any other kind of man, we are bringing in material that fire must consume.
E.E. I think all our hearts must accept that, because if it is to be God's building, it is to have stability.
E.J. Do living stones compose the temple
W.J.H. The Apostle Peter connects that with the spiritual house where the service of God in priesthood goes on -- a somewhat kindred thought; but the thought of the temple is, that there is a structure in Sydney that will assert holiness and will assert that God's glory alone is to reside there. Come what may; challenge it who will; God has His temple in this city.
A.C. And every one says "Glory."
W.J.H. Quite so. A most important matter. "Every one" as the New Translation reads. Every one that is properly part of this temple utters the glory of God.
D.J.M. Does it become us, in drawing near, like Isaiah, to say, "Woe is me, for I am undone." The seraphim are saying, "Holy, Holy, Holy."
W.J.H. I think that is the bearing of the great place the temple has in first Corinthians -- the termination of what is unholy. The apostle
{44}
determined when he went there as a master-builder, that he would know no man save Jesus Christ, and Him crucified. It was his calculated decision.
J.S.D. So that the foundation really is Jesus Christ -- the Person -- not so much His work?
W.J.H. That character of man. Any other character of man is wood, hay, and stubble, which will be burned by fire, and is to be burned now by the saints in this city. Let us not wait till the Lord comes.
J.P. Is there any difference in character between God's building and that building spoken of in @Matthew 16, where the Lord says, "I will build my assembly"?
W.J.H. The great difference is that one views the assembly as for Christ "My assembly" -- what is for His own heart in that company. This Scripture views the temple as God's -- what is here to conserve the glory and holiness of God.
E.H. The temple is not spoken of in the eternal state, because the holiness of God only is in evidence, is it not?
W.J.H. So that God then reverts to the thought of the tabernacle. In eternity, it is not the temple of God, but the tabernacle of God is with men. God can come so near, eternally, to men, as to dwell in the tabernacle, but until
{45}
that day, the temple goes through to the end, throughout the world to come.
Ques. So that you mean He will revert to the idea that was first set, forth in Exodus?
W.J.H. The tabernacle is the primary thought of God, but consequent on sin being present, even in the Millennium, God must have His temple, and it must say "glory," and it must be holy, and He is there, and if any of us defile it we are fighting against God.
Ques. That was secured in One Person, would you say?
W.J.H. The Lord said, "Destroy this temple." All was present in Him.
Ques. And now the divine idea is that it is continued and secured in others.
W.J.H. It is a magnificent thing to lay hold of -- that once God introduces one of His thoughts, never will it disappear. All the powers of hell will never move a thought of God -- and the temple is one of His thoughts.
G.H.W. Abraham looked for a city whose Builder and Maker is God.
W.J.H. He looked for a city -- which is another one of the thoughts of God, and goes through.
J.S.D. In regard to the thought of the temple in Revelation, is that connected with the saints of the present dispensation?
{46}
W.J.H. Yes, and it there has relation to dealing with evil, not in relation to the new heavens and new earth. We greatly need this feature in Sydney. Evil arises, and the temple comes into evidence. We can be sure that as Satan sought to destroy the body of Christ which was "this temple," so Satan is seeking to destroy any expression here of the temple where holiness is maintained. If we support satanic activities, we are fighting against God, and the end is certain.
Ques. The challenge by Ananias and Sapphira was to the Spirit of God in the temple, would you say?
W.J.H. Quite so. Ananias and Sapphira describe exactly what is referred to here. "If anyone corrupt God's temple, him will God destroy." They deliberately agreed together to bring corruption into the temple of God, and the fire of divine judgment removed them, and it will ultimately do that with anyone else who attempts the same thing.
K.E.F. "God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints." Does that bring in the temple character of the assembly?
W.J.H. Yes, for God is there.
E.H.G. Is not one of the features of the temple that the voice of God is heard there?
W.J.H. A very attractive feature. The
{47}
oracles are there. The assertion of holiness and divine glory in the temple, assures that we hear the oracles. But allow Ananias and Sapphira a footing, and never will an oracle be heard again.
N.B.S. This thought would search every one of us; it would also comfort and encourage us in desiring what is for God, in the assurance that it is God's temple and that He will prevail.
W.J.H. We have not to do the destroying. "If anyone defile God's temple, him will *GOD* destroy." All we have to do is to maintain in integrity the holiness of His temple, as a place for divine glory. The enemy would bring in what professes to be an oracle, but is not.
E.E. King Uzziah in the pride of his heart, and when he was strong, as he thought, went into the temple and desecrated it, and it says the Lord smote him. God is jealous for the conditions where He has put His name.
W.J.H. I am sure that we need nothing more greatly than the maintenance of the truth of God's temple. One of the divine thoughts as to saints in this city is, "Ye are temple of God." Therefore, all corruption, carnal or spiritual, must be excluded, and if there is any attempt secretly, like Ananias and Sapphira, to bring in what is corrupt, God will have to say to such, as He had to say to them. There is no possibility
{48}
of escaping the seven eyes. They see everything, and if we think we can deceive God, we have no conception of Who God is.
J.P. These words of the apostle would come home with force "Know ye not ye are temple of God."
W.J.H. That is the great corrective.
H.S.H. I suppose you would say, we need not fear the consequence of the maintenance of holiness amongst us? I was thinking of Ananias and Sapphira. It says, "Of the rest durst no man join them, *but ... believers were the more added to the Lord*."
W.J.H. Quite so. If anyone thinks that he can defeat God, he is on the losing side, and is deceiving himself.
E.H.G. It is interesting that "corrupt" and "destroy" are the same word. Corruption in the temple of God means destruction.
W.J.H. I think it is well for every one of us, and the young particularly, to grasp that until the Lord comes, Satan and his hosts will not cease to try to destroy anything that has features of the temple. The thing was seen in its supreme perfection in Christ. The Lord says, "this temple," referring to His body. His body was the temple in all its glory, in all its holiness, in all its light. Satan never ceased
{49}
opposition till he had energised man to destroy it, and we can reckon on a continuance of this.
H.G. John introduces the words "destroy this temple" very early in his Gospel. It is the opening chapter, so to speak, in the Lord's public ministry. What would you say to that?
W.J.H. It shows the hostility from the outset, against the temple, as with Ananias and Sapphira. The temple was constituted by the coming of the Spirit, and it was there in Jerusalem -- God had a temple in that city, and before many days passed, Satan, using Ananias and Sapphira with a lie, attempts to destroy it, but God destroyed them.
R.S. Under the testing of Satan, what is wrought of God will be magnified.
W.J.H. Quite so. As it is said, "Great fear" came on all of them in Jerusalem, and "of the rest durst no man join himself." But the people were multiplied. The way to multiplication, dear brethren, is to assert the rights of God.
Ques. Was that asserted by the widow, when the Lord was over against the treasury?
W.J.H. That passage shows one who loved God's dwelling place, so that she devoted everything to it she had.
E.H. She did not make it a house of merchandise, as was seen when the Lord went into
{50}
the temple and drove out those who sold oxen and sheep, and so on.
W.J.H. Quite so. He would not suffer anyone to bring in a package into the temple. A most important matter. The Lord will not allow packages in the temple. Sooner or later, He will have every package taken out.
Ques. What is the thought of a package?
W.J.H. Something hidden. Something wrapped up that is not disclosed, and there are packages at the present time in this city, and the Lord will deal with them. He will have these packages opened and the contents made clear, so that they may be judged in the light of the temple of God.
E.E. Is that not a very serious consideration? This morning, we were concerned about the assembly, and we are responsible, as such, to separate from what is not according to God but what you are bringing before us now is, that God Himself will safeguard His temple.
W.J.H. Quite so, it is the temple of God, and let none of us attempt to fight against God.
T.H. Would you say that Ananias and Sapphira were trying to bring worldly wisdom into the assembly?
W.J.H. They tried to bring in a package. They had a package drawn up in their home, the two of them. They consulted to express a
{51}
lie, and they brought this package into the presence of the Spirit of God, and they were smitten, as every one will be who deliberately brings a lie into the temple of God. Let none of us attempt to evade this. If we bring a lie into the temple of God, we are challenging God, and there is no escape.
D.J.M. If holiness marks the saints, will there be light preserved to us in the holy place -- light as to Christ by the Spirit?
W.J.H. That touches the other side of the temple, that it is the place of divine light. It is where every inquiry can be met.
D.J.M. The Lord said to Ephesus, if they did not repent He would remove their lamp.
H.S.H. Is the temple where things are preserved? Joash was hidden six years when the attack on the seed royal was made.
W.J.H. That is a very important matter. The great effort is against the seed royal. The concentrated activities of evil today are against young men, so that there should be no posterity continued here for these thoughts of God, and affection and priestly activities will hide the young in the temple.
Ques. Would you say that the boy Samuel was found marked by the right spirit, serving in the temple in a linen ephod?
{52}
W.J.H. That is very good. It is the place where Samuel grew. If you will look up that passage, you will find that three times at least, the Spirit of God states "Samuel grew" and "grew on" and "grew before the Lord," showing that spiritual growth is in the temple, and if we give up temple conditions, stagnation will result with every one of us, but if we maintain them, there will be growth, as seen in the early part of Acts.
Rem. When the children of Israel did not maintain holiness for God, they were driven into captivity and the temple was destroyed.
W.J.H. We shall lose what God has given us if we do not maintain this great feature of the temple -- holiness -- whether it be in our associations, in our actions, or in our doctrine.
Ques. Would you say that is why on the day of Pentecost, the spirit of God came as cloven tongues of fire, so that all that is not according to God might be removed?
W.J.H. That is the bearing of the Holy Spirit's presence. The Holy Spirit is here as the power to judge evil.
R.S. Is holiness connected with hearing what the Spirit would say?
W.J.H. I think hearing His voice would lead to an earnest desire to answer to God, and that must be in holiness, and it would also lead us
{53}
to a desire to see God, and without holiness no one shall see God.
F.H.G. Do you think that we confound holiness and righteousness very often? It says nothing about righteousness here.
W.J.H. Holiness is a state, righteousness has to do with actions, and God will be with His people in His temple as the state of holiness is there. It is not a question of saying, "What actually wrong thing have I done?" That is not the point. The question is a state that would repel connection with anything that is unholy.
R.S. The presence of the Holy Spirit would draw attention to things that are not in keeping with the temple of God.
W.J.H. So it says, "Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God."
J.S.D. In the question of holiness, are we to take account of what we are in the mind of God, other than what we find in ourselves, if we look within? For it says here, "The temple of God is holy, and such are ye."
W.J.H. The passage looks at things as they are according to God, that where the Spirit of God is there is holiness, and that God's temple is there. That is the thought of God, and the thing is to let that thought into our souls -- that we are part of and move in relation to God's temple. This would settle many matters for us.
{54}
K.E.F. One who is walking in holiness can say, "I have loved the habitation of Thine house, and the place where Thine honour dwelleth."
W.J.H. Let the truth into our souls, and there will be concern to conform ourselves to it. That will settle many problems.
A.C. The condition at Corinth was anything but good, but the apostle says, "Ye are temple of God and the Spirit of God dwells in you."
W.J.H. If they (as they did, thank God), let that into their souls, they would immediately put away the wicked person from among themselves, and immediately proceed to judge themselves, and to weep in relation to what was unholy.
R.S. Do you think the Lord would be the Pattern to us in John in relation to bearing? He says, "As I hear I judge, and My judgement is just."
W.J.H. That is what Scripture is for, that we might hear divine thoughts, and then judge in the light of them, not in the light of human standards.
R.S. I suppose in that way everyone would be carried in judgment?
W.J.H. The flesh would be silenced. How impressive is an assembly meeting where God rises up in His temple, silencing all flesh, and
{55}
dealing with evil. It is a most awe-inspiring moment.
N.B.S. What is proposed in regard to the temple as suggested in the dedication of Solomon's temple, is very wonderful. If things are so ordered that the ark is given its right place, the presence of God is known and manifest among His people, and so the glory filled the temple.
W.J.H. That is what we should have before us; this line of things is to secure the presence of God. A stranger comes in and he says, "God is here." That is what we shall have if temple character is secured. It will be followed by the glory coming in. But there is no hope for the glory to be present, if we give up the character of the temple.
E.E. I feel if I were to gather up what is in dozens of young souls present, they ask, "How can holiness be promoted in my soul?"
W.J.H. That is a very good inquiry, and it touches what we had this morning, that every thought of God amongst His people together has its root in the exercises of each heart individually. So that if I am to be in the assembly, the vessel of divine wisdom, I begin by loving Christ and becoming one of wisdom's children. If I am to be in God's husbandry, a plant in His plantation, it begins by an honest
{56}
and good heart, allowing God to speak to me, and receiving the seed of His word there, facing what that seed requires as soil. If I am to be in the temple, it has its root in the recognition that my body is the temple of the Holy Ghost. That is an individual matter: my body is held as a temple of God's Spirit. How free one would be then to move and to dwell in the temple of God.
J.P. So that in @Romans 6 the apostle says, "Having got your freedom from sin and become bondmen to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end eternal life." Holiness would become apparent as we become free from sin.
W.J.H. Righteousness leads to holiness. The more exercise each one of us has as to righteousness, the more we will be led on to what is holy, which is a state. But unrighteousness will soon be evident in unholiness.
Rem. @Psalm 24 speaks of "Clean hands and a pure heart." That makes room for the King of Glory to come in -- One mighty in battle.
W.J.H. That is what we want to make room for, that God should come in. Before the church is raptured I feel there will be an increasingly conscious sense of the glory, and our brethren in other localities are getting it more than we
{57}
are, and the reason is that there is more temple character there. But let us face this exercise; not simply to deal with what is unholy, but to make room for the glory.
A.C. What does Peter mean when he says, "Ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory?"
W.J.H. It would indicate that there was nothing, as far as he was conscious that would hinder the glory fully occupying the ground. Fully doing it -- filled with the glory.
E.E. If we are failing in holiness we should see to it, and come into this great end. Does the thought of loving God come into the matter? Does holiness really spring from loving God?
W.J.H. I am sure that is right. David says, "I have loved the habitation of Thy house, and the place where Thine honour dwelleth." He loved it as loving God.
J.S.D. Did Isaiah in the sixth chapter indicate the experience through which he reached holiness in the consciousness of his soul? His lips were touched with the coal from off the altar.
W.J.H. Quite so. The effect of the contact with the death of Christ brings about love, and love is the spring of holiness. I would like to go back to the root of the matter. The question is -- Are we prepared to entertain that the believer's body is a shrine for the Spirit of God?
{58}
Let us look at our private habits and ways, our business activities, our reading matter. What are we touching with our bodies? Can we say that our bodies are held as temples for God's Spirit. The body includes all the members -- not one member excluded.
Ques. Does @2 Corinthians 6:16 touch on that side, where he says, "What fellowship has God's temple with idols. Ye are the temple of the living God." Idols compete for God's place in the heart.
W.J.H. I am sure that is right. The holiness of God demands that no association contrary to God and to Christ should exist. But it is not a very big step to corrupt God's temple, if our bodies are not held as temples. It is not long before the person whose body is no longer held as a temple of the Spirit corrupts in a wider sphere, and as soon as that happens God is against such.
H.G. Was the work of Ezra and Nehemiah figurative of the recovery of the last days to maintain holiness?
W.J.H. Especially did the enemy try to bring about unholy associations linking up those who belonged to Moab with Israel.
E.H. Do you think that there must be the maintenance of righteousness, if holiness is to be present?
{59}
W.J.H. Righteousness is first, but it leads to holiness. I am sure we find if we are concerned to do what is right in every sphere, little by little it leads to holiness -- a repellent attitude against any unholy matter. The opposite also is true -- that the moment you allow an unrighteous act, then you have opened the door to an unholy state.
R.S. Is holiness connected with what is due to God?
W.J.H. It must be, for God is holy. The living creatures before His throne never cease, night and day, saying, "Holy, Holy, Holy." We need to remember that.
R.S. The presence of the Holy Spirit here would draw attention to what is due to God, do you not think?
W.J.H. Surely. These living creatures before the throne are full of eyes, before and behind and within. They are looking in front, in the direction in which we are going, and they are looking behind into the past, of our activities, and looking within, as to what is going on inwardly, seen by no one. God has these living creatures.
E.D.L. Does the last verse have any relation to what you have been bringing before us, "All things are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's?"
{60}
W.J.H. It has a very great relation, that if the holiness of God's temple is maintained, then God is free to give us the gain of the ministry that He sends -- Paul, Apollos, Cephas; and then He asserts that we are Christ's. The ark is enshrined in the temple. David designed the temple as a place for the ark. But then, Christ is God's. You have a wonderful chain thus, God and Christ, and the saints; and the saints have all the benefit of the services under the hand of the Lord.
E.E. I was thinking of Solomon's completion of the temple. God was so pleased with it, that He filled it with His presence, so that the priests could not minister, as much as to say, "I want all for Myself."
W.J.H. The thing for us to see is that both in regard to the tabernacle and the temple, when the construction was finished, the glory filled each. We are near the moment when, in a universal sense, both the tabernacle and the temple will be completed; the final touches are in process, and the glory is coming in. I believe we can say the glory is drawing near, and, therefore, it is imperative that the holiness of God's temple should be asserted without fear or favour.
T.H. Would the result of holiness be that one becomes a pillar in the temple of God?
{61}
W.J.H. What a wonderful suggestion, that in a day of unholiness and departure, of disloyalty to Christ, there should be overcomers of whom the Lord says, "I will make him a pillar in the temple of My God." Such stand out as supporting the holiness of the divine temple. The promise is in the address to Philadelphia, where we have the great recovery of the church's love to Christ.
Ques. Is the thought of glory the shining out of what God is?
W.J.H. Yes, and with that, the sense of His presence. When Solomon's temple was finished, the cloud of glory filled the house, and the priests were not able to minister -- every heart bowed down in holy worship to God, with the sense that God was there. That is how this dispensation will end, and the exercises that are increasing in many places that holiness should be maintained and evil be dealt with, lie, I think, in the fact that the building is about to be finished and the glory is coming in.
N.B.S. It would help us greatly, especially the younger ones, to get the gain of this last verse, "Ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's." We so often regard things as a system. Everything is for God's pleasure -- for *Him*.
W.J.H. That was really what one had in mind in suggesting what we have had. God
{62}
has an assembly. Could there be anything equal to being in that? God has His husbandry, where He is growing His own plants. Do we want anything else? God has a; building and a temple. Do we want to be part of any other building? Do we want to miss the glory of His temple? A young man said to me the other day, "What harm is there in so and so?" If God's great thoughts came into his heart, such a question would never have been asked.
G.H.W. There is a tendency with us to reduce the standard to meet current conditions. What you have said this afternoon would be a denial of that God's thoughts are unalterable.
W.J.H. The conditions in Corinth were just about as sad and humiliating as we could conceive, but Paul told them God's thoughts, in order to put matters right, and they are the only thoughts that are going to stand, and they are going to stand everlastingly. The thing is to embrace them like Abraham, and the patriarchs did. They embraced the promises, they let their hearts out to them -- they loved them, and ordered their way in the light of them.
E.E. What the apostle gave in his Epistles, he gave for the then existing need, but they are also for our adjustment.
W.J.H. It is remarkable in that way that the Spirit of God makes clear that what Paul
{63}
says to the Corinthians he says to us. He says to the Church of God at Corinth, "with all that in every place call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ." That brings the instruction right down to Sydney. It is in this place this Scripture applies.
{64}
THE BODY OF CHRIST
@1 Corinthians 12:5, @1 Corinthians 12:12-27; @2 Corinthians 11:1-4
W.J.H. It is hoped the Lord might lay upon us definitely an apprehension of the great thoughts of God for His people in any locality, affording there the education for working out what is of God, which in its fullest application applies to the whole church, but is worked out in local assemblies, so that things become living and expressed, rather than theoretical as they are so apt to do. Previously we were looking at the Apostle's word to the assembly of God in Corinth. While the assembly of God in its fullest thought is the whole assembly universally, Paul does not hesitate to speak of *the assembly of God in Corinth*; and Christians in Corinth would embrace that thought, that they belonged to the greatest assembly possible, and they belonged to it *in the city where they were*. Then we observed that the Apostle says to them, "Ye are God's husbandry" -- that God had a vineyard in that city, soil in which He was growing plants for His own delight. So that no other plantation would properly ever appeal to the Corinthian; no other garden would occupy
{65}
his heart but the plantation in which God was working. Then we touched a little on the fact that the Apostle said to the saints at Corinth, "Ye are temple of God." "Ye are." In this city God had His temple, where every enquiry as to the truth could be answered, and where there would be an assertion of His holiness, so that if anyone attempted to defile the temple, God would destroy him. So that a Corinthian would understand that there would be a means of reaching a solution to every moral question that ever arose, by reference to the temple, and he would be concerned that none of his associations or practices should shut the door of access to that temple.
These thoughts are the thoughts of heaven and the thoughts of God for His people in this city and in every city where Christians are; and if the young, especially, could be helped to grasp them it would lead them to feel that the only thing that counts is to stand whole-heartedly committed to divine interests in the city where God has set them; not to hold these interests as *subsidiary* in their lives, but as *dominating* them.
I feel that perhaps we may get some additional sense of the grandeur and glory of Divine thoughts by considering what the Apostle says to the Corinthians, "Ye are
{66}
body of Christ." While the body of Christ in its totality embraces the assembly from Pentecost to the rapture -- for nothing else than this is adequate to express Christ -- yet he does not hesitate to apply the thought to the assembly in Corinth so that the great truth which is universal is worked out in a living way in one city; and one would desire that the Lord would help us to grasp our part more definitely as of His body here in this city.
E.E. Would you tell us what is the salient thought connected with the body?
W.J.H. I think there are two great truths connected therewith, as indeed with the thought of the human body. One is that the body of a person is the vehicle for the *expression* of what that person is; without his body no one can know him, nothing comes into expression. While the spirit and the soul are the sources of everything that is done in the body, yet without a body nothing can be seen or known, so that the body of Christ, whether universally or in a city, is the vehicle for Christ to express Himself. Then the second great thought of the body is that of *unity*, for while the body is composed of many members, it is one, all the members functioning for the good of the body, and not independently. Independent action of a member is never contemplated, and it is not to exist
{67}
in the body of Christ. Does that answer your inquiry?
E.E. Yes, it does. So that at once we are brought into touch with what is very great and blessed to have any part in, and I suppose every true believer belongs to it by the Spirit.
W.J.H. In its universal character everyone who has received the Spirit of God is thereby baptised into one body; it is the great living bond that unites Christians together universally, but the thing is not apprehended, and therefore many Christians live as if this were not true.
G.A.v.S. Would you say then that the reason for the body of Christ being here is to provide the means for the expression of Christ which will bring out the interdependence of every saint upon every other under Christ, and also the unity and coordination which exists in that which expresses Christ?
W.J.H. Quite so. If we apprehend our place in the body, and if features of the body are with us, how it must cast us on the Head, on Christ, and make us feel our need for each other; for everything that is expressed in the body is derived from the Head.
N.B.S. Is the expression of Christ in the body public or under the eye of God?
W.J.H. Primarily it is for the divine pleasure. "A body hast Thou prepared Me,"
{68}
"Lo, I come to do Thy will." That was the prime thought as to the body of Jesus. It was prepared for the expression of the divine will. But that being so, and being apprehended by some, it led to many devoting their all to His body, as Mary did. "She has anointed my body," the Lord says. And the woman of @Luke 7 anointed His feet and did not cease to kiss them, as apprehending something that had come into expression in His body.
G.A.v.S. Are you suggesting that every local company is in the thoughts of God made adequate by the presence of the Spirit here to carry out in its spiritual measure what is expressive of Christ in that locality?
W.J.H. I understand that to be the bearing of the words, "Ye are the body of Christ," for in that city Christ would express Himself in His body. To be at all adequate, this requires all the members, and all functioning livingly. Hence we are at a very great disadvantage by the absence of so many of the members; but the thing is not to give up divine thoughts; they are going to stand, and our help and blessing will depend on standing in relation to them.
Ques. Is the Lord the source of what is expressed in the body?
W.J.H. The Scriptural word is, "He is head of the body, the assembly," and from Him
{69}
comes all the supply that the body requires, whether in its local or in its universal setting.
Ques. Would the body be the perpetuation of Christ here in this scene? He could say, "Why persecutest thou Me."
W.J.H. Quite so. I think that word shows how the Lord was observing the expression of Himself in His people so blessedly at the outset, and identifying Himself with that body. It is "Me." Though actually persecuting Christians, the Lord said, "You are persecuting Me." The thing is to stand by the divine thought. We are painfully conscious that many of the members are practically missing, but the Lord desires His thoughts to be maintained in our souls and outlook. And if one brother today commits himself to this great thought it is going to revolutionize his life.
E.E. And we may well do so. One feels when God is presenting His thoughts to us He makes them appeal to our affections. So that in Colossians where the glory of the Person of Christ is brought before us, he mentions that part of His glory is that He is Head of the body. Such is the body in the divine mind that it is one of Christ's glories to be Head to it.
W.J.H. Quite so. If the Lord's personal body were here in Sydney -- if He were here in His body, or even if His body in death were here,
{70}
what would any lover of Jesus not do? Indeed, what would the angels of heaven not do? For it says, "There were two angels sitting, one at the head and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain," though it was not there, but that it had been there, was a matter of profoundest regard to these angels. They sat there.
G.A.v.S. Would the development of these affections, in each of us, contribute to our functioning efficiently and according to God, in spite of the absence of so many who are necessary to complete the thought of the body?
W.J.H. It is a great matter to seek, with all the help the Lord would give us, to provide what is lacking. We know it cannot be fully made up, but the Apostle speaks of filling up *what is lacking*, and if fresh affections arise in our hearts to contribute something to *what is lacking* in this city, it would be a great help.
G.A.v.S. Then affections wrought in the soul would preserve us from every sense of frustration or discouragement?
W.J.H. Quite so. But God's thoughts are going through; there is no possibility of them breaking down.
Ques. Would you say there is encouragement for the young in that there is no pre-eminence in the body?
W.J.H. I suppose nothing is more blessed
{71}
than to fill our own part. In your body and mine, each member has a function that God has given it, and its true health depends upon fulfilling that. If it is an ear, what better? If it is an eye, what better? If it is a hand, what better? Because it is only functioning for the good of the whole. There is no idea of pre-eminence of a member. It is for the good of the whole, that each member of Christ's body acts, so that Christ might be expressed.
D.J.M. Why is the Spirit, rather than the headship of Christ, so prominent?
W.J.H. Because the subject is the body, and the power that makes the body of Christ a living organism here on earth is the Spirit of God.
D.J.M. Would "drinking into one Spirit" mean that every heart is satisfied?
W.J.H. The Spirit of God would so satisfy every heart, that you would not want anything else. That is what the Lord said to the woman with the water pot. He would give her living water, so that she would never thirst for ever. Some of our young greatly need this, and we all need to face it. Are we satisfied, or do we want something different? We rightly want more of what we have got, but do *we* want something different?
{72}
N.B.S. Every heart that loves Christ would delight to see the features of Christ expressed in the body. One would desire that we might have more as an object, that Christ might be expressed.
W.J.H. We can certainly say that there is not a Christian in this room but if the Lord were here in His body, he would allow the fact to govern his life. If He were in Sydney in His body, then every true Christian in this room would say -- all that matters is that I must subordinate my affections, my time, my home, my leisure, my money, to Christ. The Lord, when He was in Bethany, said of one, "She hath done what she could," as to His body.
Rem. There is no need for envy. Each has his own work. One cannot do the other's work.
W.J.H. You have only to look at your own body; you have never heard of envy in it, have you?
R.S. Coming under the lordship of Christ, we would move rightly, would we not?
W.J.H. We need His Lordship before we can get the gain of His Headship, that is, we need to be subdued. The great minister of this truth came to this, "Lord, what wilt Thou have me to do?" That is, he subjected his will to the Lord, and then he was available to the body.
{73}
E.E. As we approach this great subject, are you making an appeal to our affections, that we should give ourselves up to what is so dear to the heart of Christ?
W.J.H. Quite so. What I feel is lacking for oneself, and for many who are growing up, is caused through divine things being subsidiary; I fear they are not the controlling thing.
G.A.v.S. Is that reached on the line of sacrifice?
W.J.H. Quite so. Mary of Bethany brought what was very costly. The Spirit of God said, "very costly." She anointed His body. His body was so precious to her, that she kept what was precious for Him. She did not give to Him the fragments of what was precious. The Lord says, "Against the day of my burial hath she kept this."
H.S.H. Would you say of Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathaea, that with them, the place of Christ had been subsidiary until after His death, but His dead body brought their affections into movement?
W.J.H. That is very helpful. Nicodemus came to Jesus by night before. The Lord had a place in his heart, but he did not come out openly as fully identified with Him. And Joseph of Arimathaea was a disciple secretly, but as the preciousness of the body of Jesus came home
{74}
to their hearts, they brought the best they had; and Joseph surrendered his own tomb which he had hewn out of a rock, doubtless with great labour and exercise; it was all handed over to Christ -- to His body.
Ques. What would you say is the appeal to us in the fact that the Apostle says, "One body, so also is the Christ"?
W.J.H. That touches very closely what we have been saying, that the Spirit of God actually speaks of the saints as "the Christ," so inseparably connected livingly with Him, that they are said to be "the Christ." Not the Christ personally, but characteristically here.
G.A.v.S. It is a challenge how far we are leaving room for the introduction of anything that is not expressive of Christ, which must be a very discouraging feature for the people of God
W.J.H. When a matter comes before one as to one's associations and friendships and reading and the like, we could ask ourselves "Would this come out in Christ?" "Is this in keeping with what would be seen in His body here on earth?" If it is, let us go in for it, for it is well worth while, but if it is not, we are ignoring the fact that we are members of Christ, that we are part of His body.
{75}
G.H.W. Saul of Tarsus used his body to persecute the saints, but afterwards he could say "that Christ might be glorified in my body, whether by life or by death." So that he was brought into accord with this thought.
W.J.H. What an excellent member of the body of Christ, whose only desire, whether he lived or died, was that Christ should be greater in the eyes of the saints, than hitherto.
J.S.D. I suppose if I allow in my life that which is not in accord with the body of Christ, I damage not only myself, but the body!
W.J.H. So that an attack upon the saints in this city or any other city is an attack on the body of Christ. It is not a question of what is personal at all. The enemy sought from the birth of Jesus, through Herod, to destroy His body -- that the Lord should not be here in that body, and he is against that in every city.
G.H.W. Is it in suffering, that these qualities are brought out in the body?
W.J.H. It is in the sufferings of Jesus that the affections of those who loved Him were brought out, and it is in the sufferings of the saints that we find the same thing; the love that was in the heart of such as Mary, and the woman of the city, and Joseph of Arimathaea, came out in relation to His body.
{76}
Ques. It says of one, that "She has done what she could." Is that important in relation to each one of us?
W.J.H. Very important. That touches the teaching of this chapter; we are to find out what is our function in the body, and to fulfil it.
N.B.S. So that the Apostle puts it in a beautiful way to the Ephesians -- "According to the working in its measure of each one part."
W.J.H. That touches a matter, I am sure, that many are deeply concerned about, and that is, how much loss there is to the Lord and to the body in this city, and in nearly all places through the non-functioning livingly of members.
G.A.v.S. Would you mind explaining to us what we are to understand by that word you have used -- "functioning"?
W.J.H. One could speak sympathetically to you. You know well how much you suffer through the lack of perfect hearing, you are suffering all the time, because one member is not fully functioning. That is what is grieving the Lord, and the saints in this city -- for there are many not normally functioning according to the measure of the service committed to them of the Lord.
{77}
G.A.v.S. Would you say that the lack of functioning on the part of any individual saint is curable?
W.J.H. The ministry the Lord has sent us the last two or three years has in view that each of us should begin to function and be maintained thus. Ministry is, of course, to cleanse the channels and to strengthen the heart, so that we go on with what we are doing and take up what we are not doing, but should do.
D.J.M. This follows on the supper. Would drinking into one Spirit be drinking into the covenant?
W.J.H. Which satisfies. It is a covenant that satisfies God. He does not find fault with it; He did with the old, but not with the new. And it satisfies us as we drink into it. Two things are needed by all; one is food, and the other, joy; and they are provided in the supper.
T.H. Would you say that every member is important? In Revelation it says, "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches." Would you say the ear is very important"?
W.J.H. Surely, but as remarked, it is not a question in this setting of making one more important than the other, but seeing that all contribute for the good of the whole -- the ear
{78}
only listens for the body, the eye only sees for the body, and so on.
Ques. Is that the reason why the head is spoken of as a member here? The whole body is necessary to set Christ forth, including the head as a member.
W.J.H. Christ, being Head of the body, is not a reference to the head as part of the body, but Head, in the sense of commander or controller -- as head of an army -- that is the idea of headship, as head of an army -- every soldier being part of the army, controlled by its head.
J.P. When you speak of members not functioning, do you mean those whom we know are not conscious of their part in the body of Christ, and if so, how are we to fill up what is lacking?
W.J.H. Of course it puts greater responsibility on other members. When one member is not functioning in the human body, the other members have to rally somehow, to support the situation. The thing is to help one another to function by seeing the divine thought and embracing it as being worthy of our all.
G.A.v.S. Do you think that in the case of Timothy, when the Apostle said, "Do the work of an evangelist," he was encouraging him to do anything that was lacking?
{79}
W.J.H. Something like that. Probably he was not an evangelist by gift, but the need was there, and if others did not come forward to fulfil it, he was to do what he could, which is about where most of us are in the preaching.
N.B.S. There is another feature here in Corinthians which is very important. The Apostle exhorts them to have the same concern for one another. We have thought that the brethren ought to care for us, but everyone is responsible to care for the other members.
W.J.H. What a field, lies at our door -- those who are in moral trouble, in troubled circumstances, in exercise of soul; sheep that are lame and sick all round, available to us, but do we take it up, or are we leaving it to one or two or three? And so in the public service of God, brothers and sisters alike have a part to fulfil, and what wealth there would be if we fulfilled it.
Rem. Is it a question of what is in the household, in regard to non-functioning? The Apostle, at the end of the Epistle, refers to the household of Stephanas as the first fruits of Achaia.
W.J.H. You mean if things are not right there, the flow is blocked, is clogged; but where things are right in the household, such persons are free to function in the body.
{80}
E.D.L. What do you understand by "God has tempered the body together"
W.J.H. What beautiful symmetry there is in the human body -- every member put in its place perfectly -- everything ordered to provide a complete whole according to divine wisdom, and that is true spiritually. He has given each his own place; He has given sisters their place, and brothers, theirs, and each one, his own, and our happiness and health, and the health of the body depends on fulfilling that.
G.A.v.S. In the light of this, would you suggest that breakdown in the functioning, in anyone, is a very serious matter for the saints in that locality?
W.J.H. It is really a possible disease spot, for when a brother or sister ceases livingly to function, you never know what disease will break out in that spot.
G.A.v.S. Does not that put a very grave responsibility upon the youngest as well as the oldest here?
W.J.H. That is what I feel. That the young men especially, could be helped to feel their responsibility to find their part, and to fulfil it with all the heart! If I become stagnant and disinterested, it will not be long before a germ of disease will lodge within me, and not only will I suffer, but the body will.
{81}
G.A.v.S. Then is every one here to consider for Christ's body?
W.J.H. Would we do otherwise if His body personally were here? I do not think one Christian here would do otherwise than consider for His precious body, if it were personally here.
E.E. So, today, the response to this is not so much a matter of quantity, or of numbers, but of quality. When decline and confusion come in, it is not a matter of quantity, but of what is available?
W.J.H. Which really means it is a matter of overcoming, as in Philadelphia, and being true to the Lord's thoughts for His assembly. The Lord says, "I will make them know that I have loved thee." The Lord loves to see assembly features held and maintained, even if it is with little strength or in fewness.
E.E. One feels that it is a word of encouragement to our brethren who, through circumstances allowed of God, are placed where there are only a few. Now He desires not so much numbers -- we would be thankful for that, and accept it -- but He is looking for quality in the few.
W.J.H. If such brethren hold tenaciously to divine thoughts, the Lord will help and support them, and the Spirit of God will see that they are supplied with what they need.
Ques. It speaks of those who call upon the
{82}
name of the Lord, both theirs and ours, in @1 Corinthians 1. Would that bring in the authority of the Lord in relation to the kingdom, so as to qualify them for the assembly?
W.J.H. Very good. The Lord is available in every place. If, in any place, you have persons who really call on the name of the Lord, and are prepared to obey Him, that opens the door for the truth of the assembly of God, of God's husbandry, of the temple of God, of the body of Christ, as in Corinth. But it has its beginnings and bulwark in calling on the name of the Lord, involving subjection to Him.
N.B.S. So that these things are the Lord's commandment.
A.C. Would you say then, that Christ is continued here on the earth in His body? God having introduced Him into this scene, although rejected and cast out, He is continued here in the body?
W.J.H. God would not be God, if He introduced one thought and let it go. If you can find one thought introduced, and later disappearing from the earth, then such a thought has not come from God.
H.S.H. So, when the Lord said to Saul of Tarsus, "Go into the city and it shall be told thee what thou shalt do," he had an expression of Christ there.
{83}
W.J.H. Quite so, and in Ananias a member ready to fulfil his part and recognise another member. So he says, "Saul, brother, the Lord, even Jesus" -- "Saul *brother*." And Paul says afterwards, "I looked on him" -- on Ananias; he was conscious of a spiritual link with Ananias, for they were both members of the body of Christ.
G.A.v.S. Something more than curiosity.
W.J.H. "I looked on him." As if it were something which many years after he never forgot; he saw a member of the body of Christ for the first time in his life.
H.G. What would you say about those members that are never seen?
W.J.H. I do not know what I would say; one could say a little about those that are never heard.
H.G. I was thinking of the need to accept the place the Lord gives me.
W.J.H. Sisters as such, largely occupy the place of hearing, and of smelling, and a great deal, no doubt, of what is not seen, depends on them. The state of things in the sisters largely determines how far the features of the body come out, and if what is going on secretly in the homes is not in keeping with the body of Christ, much damage will ensue.
G.A.v.S. That is because the Spirit is
{84}
grieved. If the Spirit is grieved, then that brief must indirectly affect the whole constitution.
W.J.H. Quite so.
E.E. It may be helpful, at this point, to ask you to say a word as to "He is the Saviour of the body." This follows quickly upon the fact that, He so loved the Church that He gave Himself for it. Then it says, "He is the Saviour of the body."
W.J.H. I suppose it looks on in its fulness to the removal of this wonderful vessel. The Lord was received up in glory. But it is also true that the Head will save the body by putting His wing of protection over it, as He did by rebuking and converting Saul of Tarsus.
E.E. Would the Scripture allow that we are to be helped in understanding how the body lies in the affections of Christ, when we think of how much we think of our bodies? It is first in our minds, generally.
W.J.H. "No one has ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as also the Christ, the assembly." It is impossible to hate your own flesh. And the Lord loves His body here; He loves it in this city, as we have proved remarkably, in recent times, and He still does, and He wants us to love His body in Sydney, as if He were here personally in His body.
Ques. Would it be right to say that in
{85}
functioning in the body, we are really functioning as deriving from Christ? The assembly is "the fulness of Him that filleth all in all."
W.J.H. Which has reference to the whole assembly from Pentecost to the rapture. That wonderful vessel brings into display the excellencies of Christ, like the fulness of the earth brings out the treasures that are in the earth. As we look at the flowers, the trees, the grass, the fruit, we say, "What wonderful properties there are in the earth." As you look at the Church, the fulness of Christ, you get some little sense of what there must be in Christ.
Ques. Would the truth of @Romans 12, received and acted upon, help us to find our place intelligently, in the body?
W.J.H. There is no possibility of finding it otherwise. Before we can function in the body of Christ, we must know how to use our own bodies aright. Romans always precedes Corinthians and Ephesians, and the young need to grasp this. What are we doing with our bodies? Could what we do with our bodies be connected with the body of Christ?
H.S.H. So that the first suggestion of the body follows immediately on @Romans 12 -- the believer offering his own body.
W.J.H. Quite so. The Apostle says, "Ye are one body in Christ."
{86}
R.D. Would you say that on account of sin, man lost the power to function?
W.J.H. Surely; and Romans, therefore, is the preparation for functioning; by learning the ruin of man; by the enshrining of Christ in the heart; by being married to Him and receiving His Spirit. Then you present your body a living sacrifice. What was remarked as to @Romans 12, needs to be grasped. The Apostle says, in Corinthians, that our bodies are members of Christ. Would that not settle many matters as to the modern fashions, both for men and women? Could anything unreal or immodest be attached to Him?
G.A.v.S. I was wondering whether the second Scripture referred to does not cover that in the word "chaste."
W.J.H. Quite so, perhaps we could move on to that.
J.S.D. I would like, before we do, to ask as to the matter of functioning, whether efficiency increases, and perhaps even the range of function may increase.
W.J.H. The Apostle speaks of those who, by reason of use, have their senses exercised to discern good and evil. You may have a member you do not use, and it is not long before it is unhealthy. But use it, and its serviceability increases with use; and it is so in the assembly.
{87}
How we have all seen and known this to be so. We have heard young brothers giving thanks in a few words. If going on with God, their part in the functioning increases with use, until there is hardly a meeting but that such a brother has something to contribute.
J.P. Is it a right thought, that where there may be only a few in a city who are holding to the thought of the body, the Lord is pleased, even with that, and His thoughts are not frustrated?
W.J.H. And He says of such, "They shall be mine when I make up my treasure." Such are peculiarly precious to Christ, and He has a book written in relation to them.
A.C. How it behoves us to keep within the region of the Holy Spirit -- "Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost."
W.J.H. Quite so -- that the body is a temple or shrine for the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of God is the bond that links me with the body of Christ. These things need to be ever remembered in relation to our bodies.
G.H.W. Would not the way of surpassing excellence help us in connection with this?
W.J.H. Surely, because all true functioning in the body is in the power of love, not in envy. It is impossible to be effective if envy exists. Love is the great power for normal functioning
{88}
of each member. I read @2 Corinthians 11: 1-4 to indicate another feature in the local assembly. The Apostle says to the assembly at Corinth, "I have espoused you to one Man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ." The great thought of espousal leads up to marriage, which of course relates to the whole assembly, but has a local bearing here in Sydney according to the divine thought.
E.E. Is it the Spirit's work to espouse us to Christ?
W.J.H. Ministry, of course, is operative by the Spirit. But the Apostle says, "I have done this." He had come to that city and secured a company that was espoused to Christ -- that entered into an engagement, committing themselves as entirely for Him pending marriage, not allowing their affections to go out to any other.
G.H.W. What is the thought of simplicity as to Christ?
W.J.H. *There is no other*. The serpent brought another into Eve's heart; he really brought himself. He deceived her, suggesting God was no longer to be her only object; there were other objects, self and Satan's world really.
N.B.S. It is a solemn thing that that is referred to here.
G.A.v.S. Would you connect it in any way
{89}
with the second chapter of Jeremiah. He says, "Thus saith Jehovah, I remember for thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after Me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown"?
W.J.H. Very good. "I remember *for* thee," not "of thee." The Lord is holding for His people, those early days of their espousal, and He is going to bring us back to it. He has held those days for us, to bring us back to the espoused position.
D.J.M. Israel was holiness unto the Lord, and the first-fruits of all His increase.
W.J.H. What a situation this suggests, that in many towns and cities the Lord has chaste virgins waiting for the marriage, with their heart only for Him. I am not speaking of individuals. It begins in Romans with the individual being married to Christ, but this is what was true in Corinth, and is collective.
A.C. Would you say the local assembly is looked at as an individual?
W.J.H. The Apostle speaks of the company as *ONE*. There were not two assemblies in Corinth, only one; not two temples, not two husbandries.
G.A.v.S. Cultivation of purity of heart collectively.
W.J.H. Quite so. In earthly relationships,
{90}
once espousal is established, that governs the life. The person may go on with his or her occupation, duties and other matters, fulfilling them righteously, but the espousal governs the position, and everything is subordinated to it. Now that is what existed in Corinth. The Apostle says, "I have espoused you to one Man that I may present you a chaste virgin."
Ques. Would the question of the Lamb's wife making herself ready, enter into these exercises which you are presenting to us?
W.J.H. The process of making ready is what is going on. In the passage "She has made herself ready," the making is finished, the trousseau is made. But it is *being made now*.
E.E. Does the Song of Solomon help us to see how the Lord views the bride as being His love, His undefiled, His only one?
W.J.H. Quite so, and should He come and present Himself and the espoused not be ready, how He feels it! That is what is, alas, sometimes true. He *would* come and have communion with His own in this city, but are we ready? Or have we put off our tunic so that our own ease is so important that we cannot disturb ourselves?
N.B.S. Would not the sense of the preciousness of this in our hearts make us, like the
{91}
Apostle, jealous that nothing should come in but what is of Christ?
W.J.H. We need this holy jealousy. The only excuse for another to have the hearts of the saints in this city, is that there is another Jesus and another Spirit and another gospel. If there is, then let there be another for our affections. And as there is not another Jesus, not another Spirit, not another Gospel, then the Lord is jealous that He should have our complete affections for Himself.
G.A.v.S. I suppose that if the saints, looked at collectively, were in the enjoyment of the love of Christ in that way, they would very soon be able to say that what is different could not be attractive?
W.J.H. If God's people are giving their love to another, it really means that they are saying that there is another Jesus, and there is another Spirit.
G.A.v.S. There may be divided affections, but there is no such thing sanctioned *in Scripture* as divided affections.
W.J.H. The Old Testament recognises such a man as David having several wives, and indeed Abraham, Jacob and Moses, but no Scripture recognises any women having more than one husband. That is to say, the Lord is great enough to hold every local assembly as espoused
{92}
to Him. He is great enough to hold every human heart as married to Him. But from Genesis to Revelation there is no suggestion of more than one husband recognised by Scripture.
H.S.H. So the Lord seeks to bring Ephesus back to the espousal?
W.J.H. The Lord says, "I have against thee that thou halt left thy first love." You have not been true to the espousal, you have another Jesus, and I resent that, and all light will disappear if this is not judged.
E.H.G. Does not the thought of a chaste virgin carry the thought of an affection that has never been given to another?
W.J.H. Yet the passage in Jeremiah says that *the Lord is so wonderful that He can bring back those days to His people*. "I remember for thee the love of thine espousals."
J.S.D. You spoke earlier of ministry as that which would help the development in us of these chaste virgin affections. Does the passage in @Genesis 24, where the servant goes to fetch Rebecca, and what he has to say to her in regard to Abraham and Isaac, correspond with this service?
W.J.H. Eliezer's ministry was so successful that when Rebecca saw a man coming, she said, "Who is this man?" Eliezer said, "It is my master." So she takes a veil and covers herself.
{93}
She says, "Nobody else ever shall see me now." "I am entirely for him." That is the effect of the ministry, the espousals being complete. And then Isaac took her and she became his wife, and he loved her.
H.G. Would the experience on the mount of transfiguration be equal to that? It says, "They saw no man, save Jesus only."
W.J.H. Quite so -- "Jesus only" is the position of espousal.
{94}
SECRET THINGS
@Deuteronomy 29:29; @Amos 3:1-8; @Deuteronomy 27:14,15, @Deuteronomy 27:24
One would say a few words in relation to what is secret. The Scriptures indicate that great mysteries are in process of unfolding in our day. Mystery marks both the activities of God, and the activities of evil. Indeed, "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing; but the glory of kings is to search out a thing." From the incoming of sin into the universe, many divine activities have been in mystery and we are living in a moment when the mystery of God is about to be completed. The Book of Revelation speaks of the time of the sounding of the trumpet of the seventh angel, when the mystery of God will be completed. That is to say, as I understand it, the great mystery as to why the Omnipotent, the blessed and only Potentate, has ever allowed another will to assert itself against Him. When the seventh angel sounds, the last divine judgment on the world, the mystery of God is completed. What a mystery it has been to men's minds, and perhaps to angels, that One Who, we know, is omnipotent, should allow anyone
{95}
to assert his will against God. It is a mystery, but it is soon to be completed.
Then we have the great thought of the mystery of piety, (@1 Timothy 3: 16), "Great" says the Apostle, "is the mystery of piety. God has been manifested in flesh." What a wondrous mystery, known to piety, to those who have to do with God and fear Him, namely, that God has been manifested in flesh. Unknown to this world, to the unregenerate, seen and hated of men, cast out of the world as worthless, but the great mystery of piety is that God has been here in Jesus, and we are in the secret of that mystery as the treasure of our hearts, which holds us in attachment to Christ, now and for ever.
And then the Apostle speaks of the mystery of which he was a minister; "the riches of the glory of this mystery, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory," (@Colossians 1: 27). Christ is being formed in the hearts of the saints, particularly those of Gentiles in Colossians, also Jew and Gentile, one body, as in Ephesians -- a great mystery, the place that the Church has in relation to Christ.
The Apostle also says, "Behold I show you a great mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," (@1 Corinthians 15: 51, 52). God is
{96}
about to bring that mystery into completion. He is going to secure His people from the grave as well as those who are living, for Christ.
On the other hand, Satan is working in mystery, the mystery of iniquity (@2 Thessalonians 2: 7.).
It was begun by the serpent, inserted into the moral being of men, the desire to be as gods; and that mystery of evil already works, the Apostle says, until it comes to its head in a man who takes God's place publicly on earth. Then it is no longer mystery. When God and Christ are displaced in this world publicly, the mystery is out. The secret workings of evil have ever been to usurp the place of God. How little men know it! What a mystery it is, but it already works. Then, dear brethren, Satan has another mystery in that which bears the name of Christ in the great profession of Christianity, the mystery of Babylon the Great, the mother of harlots, the abomination of the earth, (@Revelation 17: 5). This also is a great mystery. "Mystery" says the Spirit of God, but soon to be manifested -- the mother of harlots and abominations.
Well it is with these thoughts in mind that I would like to say a word or two about what is secret in both connections -- in connection with what is good secretly, and in connection with what is evil secretly, that our souls might move
{97}
in relation to one as coming into the blessed secrets of heaven, and that we might separate ourselves more than ever from the other as that which is secretly evil.
The closing words of Moses to Israel, part of which we have read, correspond to the present moment when the Lord's ministry to the assembly is about to close. He says, "The secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things that are revealed, belong unto us and to our children for ever." That is to say, Moses closed his ministry by calling attention to the fact that there are "the secret things" which do not belong to us, which we will never understand, but on the other hand, there are the revealed things which belong to us and to our children for ever. We stand today in a similar position in the ministry the Lord has given in recent times, making clear that there are the hidden things, the secret things which are not ours. I believe many Christians thought that everything there was in existence spiritually, as to God, had been disclosed, but the Lord has made clear that there are the hidden things, and it is well to take this truth into our hearts, so that we might have an ever-increasing sense of the greatness of God and of Christ.
It is clear that there is a realm outside of the heavens and the earth, the abode of Deity from
{98}
which God humbles Himself to look on the heavens, an uncreated realm, where God resides, so that it is an act of humiliation from that altitude to look on the heavens as well as the earth, but that realm is hidden. No creature ever enters there, no seraph, no cherub, no archangel, no mere man -- ever could enter there, but, dear brethren, it exists, and it is for us to recognise that God is eternally invisible, Whom no-one has ever seen or is able to see, to Him be glory for ever and ever! How well for our hearts to recognise that the form of God is hidden, no creature has ever seen it or ever will. Scripture shows that there is "the form of God," but outside the range of the creature's eye. It is hidden. Then the relationship between Divine Persons in the past eternity is hidden. Scripture makes clear that Divine Persons were distinct from eternity, that there was glory in that realm where Divine Persons abode from eternity, and that love pervaded all. Scripture makes clear that there was equality between Divine Persons there, but there remains what is hidden, as being beyond the creature, and it is well for us to accept this in the spirit of worship, as realising how infinite God is. Then Who the Son is remains hidden. No one knows Who the Son is. It is well to take into our hearts that besides all we do know and love, and which we
{99}
worship in the light of, there is what is unknowable in the Son. He has a name written which no man knows but Himself. One of His garments is a cloud. He is clothed in a cloud, indicating inscrutability. As to *HIS* own personal glory and greatness, there is something there that is hidden and remains hidden from every creature for eternity, but there is what is revealed, and that is ours. The coming of Christ into manhood, has brought God into revelation; the only-begotten Son Who is in the bosom of the Father, He has revealed Him. Scripture makes clear that the distinctive glory that attaches to God stands connected with the Father -- "Unto us there is one God, the Father." That stands for ever. The Son and the Holy Spirit have accepted the place of service to God, while retaining ever their place in the Deity. This is for us -- part of what is revealed, and it belongs to us. Thus God is known to us, for He has disclosed to us in Christ in manhood, all that can be disclosed of Himself. Solomon speaks in his song of "Our land" -- a most wonderful suggestion. There is a land that Christ says to the assembly is "ours" -- where "the voice of the turtle is heard" -- the Spirit's voice is heard" -- and where the Lord shares, with His own, everything that it is possible for us to know and enjoy, even the knowledge of His Father and His God.
{100}
He says, "I ascend to My Father and your Father, to My God and your God." I believe that is the limit of what is revealed. We are on the boundary of the Infinite there. Beyond that is the sphere above all the heavens where Jesus as Man has gone, far above all heavens, but He brings His own into "Our land" to share everything that can be shared by men, even to the knowledge of His Father and our Father, His God and our God. So that the revealed belongs to us. There is a great range of what is revealed that is ours and our children's, while we recognise that there are also the hidden things beyond the range of the creature eternally -- the secret things.
Now, I would say a little about the passage in Amos. There we have this wonderful word that "the Lord God will do nothing, but He revealeth His secret unto His servants the prophets." I would like to commend that word to us. He will do *nothing*. If He brings evil into the city -- (for He says, "Shall there be evil in a city and the *LORD* hath not done it?") -- or whatever the Lord does, "He will do nothing without revealing His secret to His servants the prophets" -- a most complete statement.
Now, what a place the prophetic ministry has. The Lord says He will do nothing but He will tell the prophets. What is greatly needed is
{101}
room for the prophetic ministry today, because thus we learn what the Lord is doing. He will not keep one secret from his prophets, and the prophetic ministry is to help us so that we come into the secret of what God is doing. The greatest thing we could know is what God is doing. People talk about what the dictators of Europe are doing, what America is doing, but what is God doing? Is the omnipotent doing nothing? How impossible! What a suggestion that God is not active! He must be active. All His creatures are active, even the tiniest insect. Is not the creator of all the ends of the earth active? He must be active, and He will do nothing but He tells His secrets to His servants, the prophets. That runs through Scripture. If God is going to destroy the ante-diluvian world, He tells Noah that there are 120 years left ere the judgment falls. God tells His prophet He is going to overthrow Sodom and Gomorrah. He says of Abraham His prophet, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" If He is going to take His people out of Egypt, He speaks to His prophet Moses, telling him what he is doing. If He will provide a king for His people, one upon whom His eye has been, He will tell Samuel to go down, to the house of Jesse. If He is going to call for a famine for 32 years -- that there will be neither rain nor
{102}
dew, He will tell Elijah. If he is going to take Elijah to heaven, then He tells Elijah, and indeed Elisha and the sons of the prophets share in the knowledge. If He is going to leave His earthly people for 70 years in captivity He tells His prophet Jeremiah. He will do nothing but what He tells His prophets. If, as the God of the heavens, He foresees the deterioration of the Gentile world till it is part of iron and part of clay, He will tell Daniel the prophet His secret. If He will bring Jesus into this world, He will tell Anna the prophetess, He will tell Simeon, a man who is near Him. Indeed, dear brethren, He will do nothing but He will tell His secret to His servants the prophets. I am sure that ere the Lord comes to take the Church, His prophets will know what He is doing. I am not saying they will put any dates to this great matter, but His prophets will know what He is doing, and if we heed the prophetic word, we shall get the gain of it. The thing that matters is to hear His word, to be in touch with what God is doing. He always has those to whom He will tell what He is doing, and their business is to utter the prophetic word and ours to receive it; so that we may be preserved. For by a prophet He brought His people out, and by a prophet they were preserved. Ezekiel looked on a valley of dry bones, all separated one from
{103}
another. The word came, "Shall these bones live?" and God says "Prophesy," and as he prophesied bone came to its bone and skin and sinews and flesh, and there stood up a great army here for God through the prophetic word. That is what we need. Where there is disunity, where bones are scattered about, the prophetic word would bring bone to his bone, and bring also skin and flesh. But still it says "there was no breath," and God says, "Prophesy again, son of man," and the wind, the breath of life from God, came upon them, and there was a living state by the prophetic ministry. I would urge that we do not set aside what God is saying in this day, as if it did not mean something. It has in view that we should be preserved, that we should be intelligent as to what God is doing, that bone should come to his bone and that there should be life amongst God's people and not merely what is formal.
There is much more that is secret that God would promote. The Lord indicates the gain of praying in secret, a much needed exercise at the present time. It stands over against long prayers publicly. One great bane amongst the saints, one of the greatest destroyers of spiritual life in the meetings for prayer is long prayers *publicly* but what is needed is long prayers *secretly*. I think we could say without much
{104}
fear that long prayers publicly often disclose short prayers privately. Long prayers privately will make us brief publicly. Let us not apply this to another, for it is one of the greatest weaknesses among us. The Lord indicates the gain of praying in secret. Go into your chamber and shut the door and pray to your Father Who sees in secret. We may spend hours thus, if we can. But can we? Who would not admit his weakness in secret prayer? The Lord would promote it. He would also promote giving in secret, not letting our right hand know what our left hand does. Giving in secret is entirely according to God's desire, "and your Father which sees in secret will reward you openly," because what is done in secret does not redound to the credit of the person who does it in the eyes of his fellows; it is only for the eye of God.
I would say a word on the other side as to what is in secret in relation to evil. The passage I read from @Deuteronomy 27: 15, indicates what God thinks of those who secretly set up idols, for a curse was pronounced on those who made a graven or molten image and set such up secretly. This is a matter that we must face urgently if we want the blessing of God. As God comes into the secret chambers of our hearts, he looks round for images that are set up secretly. Of course, we do not set them up publicly, but
{105}
the apostle John recognises the danger of idolatry, and so does Paul, so both speak of this to the *saints*; not to heathen, not to unbelievers, but to Christians. Let us allow the Lord's eye to look into the secrets of our lives. Are there any molten or graven images, the work of the craftsman, set up there? That we are controlled by what we love, can be taken as absolutely true, and in the last days the apostle makes clear there would be many things seeking the love of men's hearts. In the last days it says, "there shall be perilous times, men shall be lovers of *themselves*." Self set up, the object of the heart, everything made subservient to it -- an a idol; lovers of *money*, the root of all evil, an idol that displaces God; lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. God's worshippers are lovers of God, but who will deny that devotees of pleasure abound, and are we free? Time and strength and money that the precious interests of Christ should have are often devoted to pleasure. God help us to face this, and add our "Amen" as to what God thinks of idolatry! The word is, "unto us there is one God -- the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ." Let us allow the scrutiny of the divine eye to search us, for the cases of sorrow that arise among us, I fear, have their roots in idolatry. John says, "Children
{106}
keep yourselves from idols." So that we have to take account of the secret setting up of idols.
Then we have this word, "Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly." A very serious matter. There are times when smiting is necessary; when one prophet said to another, "Smite me." There was a time when Paul the apostle smote Peter, but he did it to his face; not secretly. He warns the Corinthians about whisperings. Whisperings are things said in secret which God hates. The Lord when on trial said, "In secret have I said nothing, I ever spake openly." That is, as to what He had to say about Caesar and about men, He did not whisper it. He said, "I ever spake openly and in secret I have said nothing." Many of the sorrows that we are facing at this time lie in secret smitings. The Spirit of God warns us that in conflict we must not smite secretly. No hand must touch what is secret in conflict, or such a hand must be cut off. This warning is specially addressed to women, though we all need it. There is a tendency, and especially with sisters, in conflict to attack through what is secret, and God's judgment will come upon such as do this. There is that which is secret in many lives which God has covered, and in conflict let no one uncover it, for God's judgment will come upon such. When matters have to be faced, let us come into
{107}
the open. God loves to have things in the light.
We were speaking about the Lord not allowing any package to pass through the temple. I appeal to anyone who has a package, something that is covered, which is being brought into the temple, to see that the Lord will not suffer it; He resents it. God's holy eye, and the eye of Christ is on that package. I would appeal to every heart to take such packages out. Better to have to go out yourself than attempt to bring a package into the house of God, which He will not suffer.
That is all I had in mind. While recognising there is that which is beyond the creature eternally, there is also a vast domain that the Lord would bring before us, even to the edge of the infinite, where we bow down before God in holy worship. Think of eternity, and there is sufficient to fill every heart with eternal joy and satisfaction in what is revealed!
There is the promise of the Lord that He will do nothing but He will reveal His secrets to His servants the prophets, that what the Lord is doing right up to the rapture He will tell His prophets. Prophetic ministry is to bring us into the light and the protection and blessedness of what God is doing.
Then there is secret prayer and secret giving, both acceptable to God and to the Father, Who
{108}
sees in secret. There is the curse on secret idols, and "Let all the people say Amen'." There is the curse on smiting anyone secretly, and judgment on touching what God has covered. There is no one exempt from the necessity of facing these matters. It says, "Let *all the people say*, Amen'."
