  
Table of Contents
The Kingdom Of God
Jottings Of A Reading
Reading On Psalm 40
The Path Of Life - Psalm 16
The Sword And The Sacrifice
Moral Power
“The Apple Tree”
Notes Of Addresses In Ilford
The Kingdom Of God
Abiding
The Holiest
The Secret Of Joy
Apprehension Of Our Glory Leads To Discipleship
“Maschil” Or “Giving Instruction”
Recovered For God's Pleasure
The Law Of The House Of God
The Priesthood Of Christ
Our Place And Portion
A New Generation
The Disciplined Man
The Perfect Servant
The Perfect Servant (continued)
Unity
The Riches And Glory Of God's Grace
God Is, And God Will Prevail
The Purpose Of God To Make My Life Beautiful
“Jehovah My God, My Holy One”
The Moral Features Of A Man Of God
The Servant Of God And His Characteristics
The Sower As Presented In Mark's Gospel
Reading At Parkstone
Pardon, Salvation, And Peace
Convicted, Cleansed, Clothed, Crowned And Counselled
The Ministry Of Reconciliation
Law And Grace
Righteousness And Peace
The Love Of God
Three Days
The Present Triumph Of The Gospel
“To”, “By” And “In”
Devotedness To Christ
Seeing, And Seeing Clearly
The Moral Features Of Christian Fellowship
Two Addresses On Psalms 90, 91 And 92
The Title To Live Forfeited
Christ The One Who Established His Title To Live
Salvation And Righteousness
“The Blessing Of A Fixed Heart”
Recovered For God’s Pleasure By Christ As Head
The Way Out Of Confusion
“Blessed Are They That Dwell In Thy House”
“Living To God”
‘Rubbing It Out Bit By Bit’
“Be Sure Your Sin Will Find You Out”
The Squire’s Way To Heaven
‘All Clear From There To Here’
“Vanity Of Vanities”
Much Fruit
God Glorified
The Love Of God
The Gospel In The Psalms
A Few Thoughts On The Psalms
God’s King
Reading Of The Scriptures
The Light Of Life
A Faithful Saying
The Knowledge Of God
God’s Interest In One Soul
Discipline - Chastisement - Instruction



ADDRESSES
AND
OTHER MINISTRY 

BY 
WILLIAM JOHNSON









Edited and Published by Andrew Burr 
81 Roxburgh Road London SE27 0LE UK
burr.andrewlinda@btinternet.com
ISBN 978-0-244-50413-7
2019


INTRODUCTION
  This book demonstrates that a significant body of ministry by William Johnson can be found, although he is little known nowadays.  Indeed, most of what can now be said about his life has to be gleaned from remarks in the addresses in this book.

  William Johnson was born in 1850, and grew up under a godly mother in Brixham.  As soon as he was old enough, he left home for what he calls his ‘sea liberty’.  He says his mother’s prayers were answered by his coming to the Lord as a sailor at the age of 18 at a gospel preaching in a church in Glasgow.  Of the interim, he says: ‘
It was absolute slavery … I have sat in a concert hall and heard sweet music and I have felt the touch of my mother's hand and heard her pleading voice.  She was spoiling all my pleasure by her prayers’.  He speaks of his working life as a seaman
; like his father, he was a Master Mariner - and referred to sometimes as Captain Johnson.  He was married with a son and three daughters
.  In the 1880s, he lived in
 Ramsgate, where he and his father owned a fishing smack.  The family was later recorded in 
West Ham, and he lived with his wife and daughters in New Malden from 1911 if not before.  
(His son was killed in the Great War in November 1915 shortly after going to Belgium with the Royal Army Medical Corps.)  He 
can be found taking an active part in other published reading meetings from around the turn of the century.  There is a record of visits 
with his wife to the brethren in the United States and Canada in 1910-11 and 1913, and to his serving in various places there.  His last ministry was a reading at Parkstone (
a note from which is included here); he died unexpectedly in Boscombe on 28 April 1921 and is buried in Bournemouth. 
  Mr James Taylor, wrote a few weeks later to Mr D’Arcy Champney: ‘Like ourselves you will feel keenly the departure from among us of Mr Johnson.  The
 Lord has given our beloved brother (especially of late) a great place in the affections of His people’. 
  The production of this new book has been prompted by finding manuscript records of five addresses given in Ilford in 1916.  These manuscripts read like texts that have been revised for publication, although they contain no word that this was done; they appear here 
worded as found except in two places marked by end-notes; and the correction of quotations. 
  All the other articles - sixty in all, and re-produced here with the original content similarly unchanged - have come from pamphlets or periodicals; the source is given for each piece.  
I would like to share any other published articles not included here.  
Insofar as William Johnson’s ministry may already be known, it is most likely on account of another work, Meditations in the Psalms, published immediately after his death in 1921.  These notes first appeared in that year in 
The Believer’s Friend in serial form; they were collected from the periodical by its editor, Russell Besley.  This work is not reproduced in this book to allow room for all the other material that has become available.  This material shows how often our brother drew on the Psalms in his ministry 
- for which, evidently, he had a particular gift from the Lord.  

  Most of this ministry can be dated, for example from the title or the date of the periodical in which it appeared.  Several pieces can be 
placed at the end of our brother’s life by references to the years from his conversion.  
This book puts the oral ministry first with the dated pieces before the undated.  There is then a group of written pieces; some of which have appeared as gospel tracts.
  
The tracts do re-tell stories also found in the addresses; but a few other small pieces found in old periodicals have been omitted as they proved to be entirely replicated in longer articles. 
  The King James Bible has been used throughout this ministry - with occasional use of the Darby Translation; the two versions have been left as found, but every quotation has been checked and corrected as necessary.
  Mr Johnson’s remark in his address on Unity a hundred years ago applies to readers as it does to speakers and hearers: “it is absolutely necessary that both speaker and hearers should be found together in exercise … Being in fellowship and having taken a certain position will not save us.  The needed thing with each is downright exercise of soul”.
  
I believe the Lord will be honoured by making ministry given in this spirit more widely available.  

  
  ANDREW BURR
  
Contents
The Kingdom Of God
Jottings Of A Reading
Reading On Psalm 40
The Path Of Life - Psalm 16
The Sword And The Sacrifice
Moral Power
“The Apple Tree”
Notes Of Addresses In Ilford
The Kingdom Of God
Abiding
The Holiest
The Secret Of Joy
Apprehension Of Our Glory Leads To Discipleship
“Maschil” Or “Giving Instruction”
Recovered For God's Pleasure
The Law Of The House Of God
The Priesthood Of Christ
Our Place And Portion
A New Generation
The Disciplined Man
The Perfect Servant
The Perfect Servant (continued)
Unity
The Riches And Glory Of God's Grace
God Is, And God Will Prevail
The Purpose Of God To Make My Life Beautiful
“Jehovah My God, My Holy One”
The Moral Features Of A Man Of God
The Servant Of God And His Characteristics
The Sower As Presented In Mark's Gospel
Reading At Parkstone
Pardon, Salvation, And Peace
Convicted, Cleansed, Clothed, Crowned And Counselled
The  Ministry Of Reconciliation

Law And Grace
Righteousness And Peace
The Love Of God
Three Days
The Present Triumph Of The Gospel
“To”, “By” And “In”
Devotedness  To  Christ

Seeing, And Seeing Clearly
The Moral Features Of Christian Fellowship
Two Addresses On Psalms 90, 91 And 92
The Title To Live Forfeited
Christ The One Who Established His Title To Live
Salvation And Righteousness
“The Blessing Of A Fixed Heart”
Recovered For God’s Pleasure By Christ As Head
The Way Out Of Confusion
“Blessed Are They That Dwell In Thy House”
“Living To God”
‘Rubbing It Out Bit By Bit’
“Be Sure Your Sin Will Find You Out”
The Squire’s Way To Heaven
‘All Clear From There To Here’
“Vanity Of Vanities”
Much Fruit
God Glorified
The Love Of God
The Gospel In The Psalms
A Few Thoughts On The Psalms
God’s King
Reading Of The Scriptures
The Light Of Life
A Faithful Saying
The Knowledge Of God
God’s Interest In One Soul
Discipline - Chastisement - Instruction
Editor's Notes
   

THE KINGDOM OF GOD
Luke 17: 11-21; Luke 18: 9-24
  I desire, by the help of the Lord, to bring before you a very important subject - an elementary subject, but an important one, “The Kingdom of God”.  I am desirous to show you the practical import of the subject.  

  The expression “the kingdom of God” is found several times in the passages we have read.  Indeed, in this gospel you find the expression frequently.  It is also found in other parts of Scripture - in Paul’s writings, and in the Acts of the Apostles.  Let me put this question to you: when you read a passage which speaks of the kingdom of God, or as your minds are now directed to the expression, 
‘What does it convey to you?’  Give some account of it; not merely a theological account, or something you have read in pamphlets, but a spiritual account, as one who has tested what is involved in the expression.  

  In the first chapter of Acts the Lord spoke of these things during His forty days sojourn on the earth, He spoke of the kingdom of God.  And at the close of the Acts, where you find the apostle Paul a prisoner at Rome, he preached to them the kingdom of God.  I desire to show you, beloved friends, from the history of the leper in Luke 
17, how the kingdom of God is discovered.  It is, I think, the mind of the Spirit in this well known incident, to present to you, in figure, how the kingdom of God is discovered, and the result of the discovery.  I divide the subject into three parts: 

  1.  The discovery of the kingdom of God, and its results.  

  2.  
What the hindrances are to our entering into God’s kingdom.  

  3.  The elements which compose it.  

  In the passage referred to, there are ten men who are lepers.  Leprosy is a type of that awful moral disease with which men are afflicted, 
‘the disease of sin’.  These lepers are sensible to their condition, and they cry for mercy.  Jesus is there, and they cry to him, “Jesus
, … have mercy on us”.  He is always ready to hear a cry.  That is very comforting.  He is always ready to answer a cry, and always does.  Now mark the passage, “Go show yourselves 
unto the priests”.  Go show yourselves was the command, and off they go, and as they went they were healed.  
Not when they got there.  
One man was on the eve of a grand discovery.  One man 
out of ten stops - he is arrested - he is about to discover the kingdom of God.  They were on the way to a system represented by the priests, a system marked by demand, but which never revealed God.  Now, this one man having stopped can say, as it were, 
‘What is the good of going to the priests?’ he would the rather go into a system marked by that sweet and precious word, ‘grace’.  He goes back to the Deliverer - to the Healer, and falls at His feet.  Dear Christians, the Lord 
‘does what He does, and gives what He gives, in order that we may know what He is’.  

  The influence produced upon this man sets forth very beautifully the results of entering God’s kingdom.  He glorifies God, he falls at the Lord’s feet, and he gives thanks.  In God’s kingdom God is glorified, man is effaced, and your heart is thankful.  The leper has discovered the kingdom of God.  Immediately the Spirit of God tells us (and all is put together in moral order) that the Pharisees ask the question, When shall the kingdom of God come?  The Lord replies, “The kingdom of God come
th not with outward observation”.  And He also says, “The kingdom of God is in 
the midst of you”.  Where was it?  In His blessed Person.  Although God had come out in Christ in this wonderful way, yet they were unacquainted with Him.  

  The Lord is showing what the leper has discovered.  The leper was cleansed to discover the kingdom of God.  Oh!  the self-righteous people of that day! they missed it.  They did not get low enough to find it.  It is when we are subjects of sovereign mercy and grace that we come to the kingdom of God.  If you are to be a happy Christian you must know the kingdom of God.  There are very few happy Christians.  Christians have a right to be happy, but it is a rare thing to find one.  You cannot sing yourself into happiness.  Scripture tells us to sing when we are happy.  I want you to get rid of what I call 
‘evangelical sentiment’.  I love to sing, but scripture says, “I
s any merry? let him sing”.  Not 
‘let him sing to be merry’.  God’s way for you and me to be happy is found in His kingdom.  

  I will now give you a definition of the kingdom of God: ‘It is the moral apprehension, which you have by the Spirit of what is suitable to God known in grace which governs you’; being governed by what is suitable to God, you are a happy Christian.  Do you know what mars our lives?  It is 
self-consciousness.  
Do you know what will brighten your lives?  It is 
God-consciousness.  
Do you know what would deliver us from the influence of what people think of us? - from sensitiveness?  It is what God thinks of us.  

  “To be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace”.  That is God’s kingdom.  The whole subject is gone into in detail in the epistle to the Romans.  Let me try to give you an idea of Romans in three sentences: 
‘I am a justified man, set up in the power of the Spirit to walk in God-consciousness’.  “The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit”.  I would greatly desire for every young Christian to walk in God-consciousness.  That will save you from being merely religious.  You love to hear the gospel, because it assures you all is right.  You love to sing about Jesus on Sundays, but what about the rest of the week?  No touch with God?  No touch with Him in your business?  No touch with Him when you are walking on the street, in your goings out and your coming in.  I am speaking now of what is individual, of the elementary part of Christianity.  What is the result of God-consciousness?  You disappear, you cease to be big.  You are blotted out practically.  

  O keep us, love divine, near Thee, 
  That we our nothingness may know, 
  And ever to Thy glory be 
  Walking in faith while here below.  

  This sets forth the kingdom of God.  

  Now we come to the hindrances.  From verse 22 of chapter 17 to verse 9 of chapter 18 is a dispensational parenthesis.  The Lord returns to the subject in verse 9 of chapter 18.  The Pharisee says, 
“God, I thank Thee”.  That sounds like the leper, when he gave God thanks.  Now, continue: “God, I thank Thee
, that I”.  That is self-consciousness.  That “I” sticks to us like pitch.  The self-righteous have no place in God’s kingdom.  Now look at the narrative.  Children are brought to Jesus.  The disciples are too big for children.  The Lord says, 
‘Bring them to Me and I will teach you.  Unless you become like a little child you can in no wise enter the kingdom
’.  In natural things you must understand to believe; in divine things you must believe to understand.  The mental “I” has no place in God’s kingdom.  You must become as a little child.  A simple child!  there is nothing more charming!  Mentally we have no place in God's kingdom.  The self-righteous “I”, the mental “I”, are excluded.  

  We now come to the next incident.  Here we have the wealthy “I” - the “I” of acquisition, and this, also, has no place in God’s kingdom.  “How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God”.  Man loves riches because it gives him a place, but riches are a positive 
hindrance to entering the kingdom.  It is quite possible, however, for a man to have a large amount of money and to be quite clear of its influence - to walk in the Spirit, and others may have only a small sum and think a lot of that.  It is the “I” of acquisition, it is the principle, the disease - the desire to acquire, which is the hindrance.  “I speak as to wise men”.  Does it touch you?  The mental “I”, the wealthy “I”, the self-righteous “I” are the three great hindrances.  Now we come to the elements, which go to compose the kingdom of God.  There are five great elements.  The first is 
relief, then revelation, resurrection, realisation, and lastly, relationship.  There must be relief first.  Relief and revelation are seen in the death of Christ.  That which relieves me, reveals God.  I ask, Has the Lord Jesus Christ relieved you?  What is the nature of the relief?  My sins and iniquities are remembered no more.  There could not have been relief had not Christ died.  But the relief is not merely that my sins are gone.  It is 
myself.  
I know what it is to be justified, but the next question is far more terrible, the discovery of the “Me”.  Mark it well!  There must be an experimental journey to appropriate the second point in relief.  “The ‘Me’ is gone”.  Let me refer to Psalm 139, “Lord, Thou hast searched me, and known me”.  I cherish that verse.  The place where I was searched out; the place where I was 
exposed, is the place where I was disposed of.  The death of Christ is God’s own absolute answer to the 
‘Me’.  He has judged it.  He has effaced it from the root up.  Peter said, Lord, look at 
“the fig tree which Thou cursedst”.  But the Lord looked there yesterday; He will never look that way again.  God never looks that way.  In the yesterday of the death of Christ He looked that way.  The 
‘Me’ is withered, in the sight of God, from the root right up.  Thank God!  That is your title to turn away from it all, and never to expect any good from it.  

  There are three ways in which you can learn your bad nature: 
  1.  In the practice of sin.  

  2.  In the effort to be good.  

  3.  In the presence of goodness.  

  There it is without a bit of anguish.  The first way is the most superficial way.  People have an idea that the man who has led a foul life has consequently a deeper sense of sin than others.  I do not believe it.  I do not think a man picked up out of the gutter has a deeper sense of sin than a child brought up in a godly household, for the child will have the deeper sense of sin in the effort to be good and in the discovery of the 
impossibility of being what it ought to be.  The third point is that sin can 
be learned in the presence of Jesus without a bit of anguish.  As our hearts take in His glory, His beauty, His moral Excellency, we begin to learn that no other man would do for God.  Now we begin to prove in a deeper way the death of Christ that has relieved us.  We can sit and bask in the sunlight of His moral glories and beauties, and that is the deepest way in which to learn our own badness.  It is in the presence of perfect goodness.  The death of Christ has revealed God in the place where I lost the 
‘Me’.  I have found God.

  Christ has lit up all that dark and distant spot with the brightness of the glory of God, and He has gone up on high.  There He is, and there in His blessed face shines the glory of God.  And gazing there we can say, 
‘Thou art there’ - God is.  There is the revelation in His own blessed face of what He secured in death as the Mediator of the new covenant.  What He secured in death He livingly presents.  He has revealed Himself, and I am relieved of myself and my sins in the death of Christ.  It is His own perfect answer to everything that would hinder my enjoyment of the revelation of Himself.  The sun shines upon me now.  When the apostle was writing to the early converts at Thessalonica, he sums up the effects of his preaching, “They turned to God from idols”.  He did not say they had their sins forgiven, which of course they had, he did not say they had peace with God, that is detail.  He did not say 
‘you are justified’.  No!  What then does he say?  “Ye turned to God from idols”.  In the gospel the apostle so presented God to them in the fullness of His grace and love that they turned to Him from idols.  And what to do?  “To serve the living and true God”.
  
That is God’s kingdom.  They were so living in God’s kingdom and in the power of it that they looked out for its public display.
  
It was no sentimental thing with them.  They were living in God’s kingdom; they were serving the living and true God, and looking for His Son from heaven.  No one can be in the hope of the Lord’s return if he is not in the kingdom of God.  How could you be looking for the Lord if you are living a life of self-will!  You are not morally suitable.  A man once asked me this question: 
‘Is it well with you?’  I said to myself, 
‘Is it well with Christ?’  If it is well with Him it is well with me, because He is my Head.  If it is well with the Head it is well with me.  
‘That is resurrection’.  Remember this, 
‘He took your place in death that you might have His place in life’.  You are on the same footing as Christ is, and you receive the Spirit that you may live of His life.  The result of receiving the Spirit 
is that you are taught to love God.  The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts.  You are upon the resurrection platform.  You have the power of the Spirit to enable you to enjoy the revelation.  You are endowed with that marvelous capacity from Christ, your Head, having received the Spirit that you may live of His life, and bask in the sunshine of the revelation which He has made of God, and this becomes life to you.  I know God and love Him.  

  We now come to realisation.  Love is in the Spirit.  You have received the Spirit from Christ, and you love God.  There is your happiness.  I do not now desire gold.  I know now my happiness, my heart is responding to His love.  Let Him, dear Christian, love you into loving Him.  

  I pass on to the relationship.  It is this: We are children with the Father, in God’s kingdom.  We are translated into the kingdom of the Son of His love.  This is the climax, you are there, loved by the Father.  You are loved as Christ is loved.  It very closely touches the family, but yet we are children in the kingdom.  As you walk down here with your heart responding to the love of God, you bear the character of Christ in this world.  To be Christ-like is to love God.  I often say, would to God we were more charmed by what is Christ-like than by doctrine merely.  Not simply to be a lecturer, but to be a liver.  If your heart is under the influence of the love of God, it will exclude the influences of evil, the very feelings, and this is holiness.  May God bless this subject to you, and may each of us desire a larger entry into the kingdom of God!  The reason people are unhappy is on account of the working of their own wills, but the only thing that can conquer our will is the love of God.  I do not take so much account of what a man says; it is the spirit of the man which shows what he is and where he is.  “Lord, my heart is not haughty
, nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise myself in great matters, or in things too high for me.  Surely I have behaved and quieted myself
, as a child that is weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child”.  (Psalm 131).

  That is God’s kingdom, and the first great mark of a man being in that kingdom, is that he is broken in spirit.  

_________________________
  From ‘Words of Grace and Encouragement’, 1901

JOTTINGS OF A READING
At The Farm, Quemerford, 7th June 1902
J.W.B.  proposed as subject - The difference between knowing the Scripture and knowing Christ.

W.J.  The case of the eunuch, which we read this morning, is a good illustration of it.

ACTS 7: 25-40 read
W.J.  Many read the scriptures, and even read them a great deal, but do not seem to know much of the Lord personally.

  In Luke 4, the Lord goes into the synagogue, and the book of the prophet Esaias is put into His hands to read.  He reads the prophetic scriptures, but there He was Himself, the living Person, in their midst.  He reads and then says, “This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears”.  Now look at the eunuch
 - he “sitting in his chariot read Esaias the prophet”.  It was well for him that he was reading the scriptures, but he had not got yet the key to them.

C.  “They are they which testify 
of me”. 
W.J.  Yes; but it was the “
Me” who blessed the eunuch.
J.P-tt.  It is very interesting to see the order in which the eunuch is led on.  First, there is interest in the scriptures; then he gets the key to scripture - Christ, and then there is the moral effect - “What doth hinder me to be baptised?” - he is baptised.  He had found Christ, and he goes the same way that He went; he goes into death.

J.W.B.  The great characteristic of Christianity is that it is a living, loving 
Person, not a system of doctrines.
J.P-tt.  I do not think anyone gets right as to doctrine who makes doctrine an 
object; we must have the Person.  Take the case of Cornelius (Acts 10), there was evidently a work of God in him; he had desires, and God sent Peter to enlighten him.

  All here is in the death of Christ, but death is the path to resurrection.  “Henceforth know we no man after the flesh; yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more”; there is no such Christ to be known now as Christ after the flesh.

W.J.  I think many do not understand the presence of the Lord in the assembly, they have never touched it, and so when the word is ministered they do not feel that the Lord has touched them in it.  The real thing is to have a sense that the Lord has spoken to you - that you have come under His influence, that 
He has touched you.  You might remember all that was said in the ministry, and yet it might not be one bit of good to you.  It is everything to get a sense that the Lord has touched me 
secretly.  It may be that He has put His finger on something which is hindering me in my service.

W.E.  Have we an example of it in Mary sitting at the feet of Jesus? 

W.J.  Yes; she came under His influence.  People read scripture and know a great deal about the Lord, but they do not 
know Himself.  It is by the Spirit that you come into the good of things, not by the letter.

J.P-tt.  I think faith is light in the soul of what is presented, but if it does not bring you into exercise and near the Lord, you do not gain much.

W.J.  Take the late meetings that we have had here.  Honoured servants have ministered to us, but if we only come under the influence of the servants, that will not do; we must come under the influence of the Lord Himself.  That is the only way to get the good of the ministry or to get any real knowledge; it is what you receive from the 
Lord that is effectual.  We may go to and fro like a door on its hinges; we may listen to ministry and enjoy it; but if it be only a general knowledge of all that has been said, it does me no good.  What I want to feel is, that the Lord has spoken to me in it.  The eunuch could say good-bye to Philip, who had been used to him in such a wonderful way, and go on his way rejoicing because he had Christ - he had the key to scripture.  He had found the Man who had died, risen, and gone up, and so he could do without the channel that had been sent to enlighten him.  When we come to these Quemerford meetings, we are often depressed afterwards, because the Philips are taken from us; but if a fresh link has been formed between your soul and Christ, you can go on your way rejoicing.  If you 
neglect the gifts, you are all wrong.
J.W.B.  But if you have the truth only as what Mr So-and-So teaches, it is no good to you; you must have it as spoken to you from God.

W.J.  Philip was God's man for the occasion, and the eunuch could not have done without him; but when he has got the key to scripture he can go 
on his way rejoicing, though Philip was taken from him.  The fact was, his soul was linked with another Man and another scene.

  It is possible to read scripture, and even to find pleasure in it, and yet not to get linked with the Lord by it.  But mind you this, this man 
did not throw away his roll; doubtless he valued it all the more - he held on to scripture, but he had got the key to scripture in personal contact with Jesus.  It is a living thing.  Many a time I have thought of the Bible as a gramophone, you must get not only the 
words but the living voice.
W.T.P.  “Till I come, give attendance to reading
, &c”.  Would you say we could do with the Lord apart from the scriptures? 

W.J.  No; but in the early days they had not the New Testament scriptures.  We see in the Thessalonians the moral effect.  The apostle could say of them: “Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope”, &c., there was a moral effect.  Certain facts had been ministered to them, and believed by them, and certain moral effects were produced.  The apostle says, “Who also hath made us able ministers of the new testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit”.  The scriptures are given to direct us, without them we should get into mysticism.

Rem.  “Shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was the Christ”. 

W.J.  That is it, and now we are living in the midst of a Judaised Christianity, so it is all the more necessary for us to reason out of the scriptures.  Supposing you went out as a missionary to the heathen, you would need to carry the gospel to them livingly as well as the scriptures.  You would state the truth to them, but you must be the moral expression of it for them to see.

W.T.P.  The Lord said, “This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears”. 

W.J.  Yes; He was there the living Person.  The eunuch came in contact with that living Person, and he could go on his way rejoicing.  Paul says to Timothy, “The holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus”.  It is good to preach Christ to people; but you must preach One whom you 
know.  Then how necessary it is to be near the Lord and to know Him for this.

  “Preach the word” is a very large expression, it does not mean the scriptures, but the testimony of God, the record of it is in scripture.  You 
are “mighty in the scriptures” if you know the Lord.  I think it is interesting to see how things are set forth in the Acts.  In chapter 8 we have the eunuch; he gets the key to scripture in Christ.  Then in chapter 9, we have Saul; he is brought to own Him as Lord
: “Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?”  
Then Ananias, “Behold I am here, Lord”, The question is not - Do I read the scriptures or do I pray, but do I in my spirit confess Him as Lord?  Is it the habit of my life?  People do not know Him much as Lord.

Ques.  Might not a young believer know Him as Lord? 

W.J.  Yes, it is proper to him to know Him thus.

Ques.  Do you mean that if you know Him as Lord, you know what suits Him? 

W.J.  That would follow as result.  Take the Ephesians.  Paul says of them, “After I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the saints”.  They had the Lord Jesus objectively before them, not as their Saviour simply, but as Lord.

W.E.  How is it that so many of us do not know Him personally? 

Rem.  There are degrees of knowledge.

W.J.  There are.  There are two characteristics of a Christian.  He believes on the Lord Jesus Christ and on God who raised Him from the dead.  

  I believe in God now; I believe in Christ now; it is not a question of what I have believed, it is a continuous and present thing.  If you simply believe in scripture, there is nothing 
living about that.
W.T.P.  Is there any difference between knowing the Lord individually, and knowing Him in the assembly? 

W.J.  Yes; but you will not know Him in the assembly if you do not know Him individually.  Do you not know the difference between reading scripture and praying in a religious sort of way, and coming into 
living contact with the Lord?  When one points out these things, people say - you are undervaluing scripture; but there is no moral work in the soul apart from living contact with Christ.  In the Epistle to the Hebrews we find that there is a living voice in the house of God.  When a living Person is presented, your affections are brought into play, Every precept in 
scripture, all that we find in Psalm 19, is presented to us in a Person.  If I take up precepts apart from the Person I am on legal lines.

Rem.  “The words that I speak unto you
, they are spirit, and they are life”. 
W.J.  It is the contrast between “spirit” and “letter”.  How could you understand what He had been saying to them otherwise?  “I am the bread of life”, &c.

B.B.  “The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life”. 

W.J.  I sometimes ask young Christians, and I ask myself - Do you know what it is to come under the influence of the glory of the Lord? 

J.W.B.  The effect is you are transformed into the same glory.

W.J.  Yes; it is quite different from merely reading scripture, you come under a moral influence.  I have a living Person in me - the Holy Ghost; and He links me with a living Person in heaven.  Sometimes I read, and read, and then shut my Bible and say - I will get near the Lord; then you get wonderful things unfolded to you.

None of us express Christ unless we enjoy Him first.  The value of true ministry is that it links you with Christ Himself; “
married to another, even to Him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God”. 
J.W.B.  I suppose you must be withdrawn from all that is of man to get under the influence of Christ? 

J.P-tt.  So it was with the eunuch in baptism.

W.J.  Yes; he was severed from this world and put in touch with another world.  

  We are often tested in connection with these things.  You must get things from 
the Lord or you will never get on.
_____________________
  From ‘Truth for the Time’, 1902
  
 READING ON PSALM 40
  At Quemerford
W.J.  Psalms 40 and 41 should be read together: it is the conclusion of the first book.  The title of the first Book of Psalms is, 
‘I have found a man to my pleasure’; and in that One He will bless us.  God finds the Man after His own heart, who will fulfil all His will, and in Him we are blessed.  In reading this psalm you should begin at verse 5, because it is a conclusion arrived at.  It is a psalm of the deepest interest.

  In the first Book of Psalms you get Satan's man.  We learn by contrasts.  In Psalm 10 you get the moral features of Satan's man, but he is only introduced to make way for God's Man, who comes out in Psalm 16.  The wicked one of whom the apostle speaks in Thessalonians is there.  Everything comes out in the Psalms.

  Then God describes His Man.  In Psalm 15 He is described, but in Psalm 16 He is found - the One who is after His own heart, and who shall fulfil all His will.  But this psalm involves resurrection.  He could not be a Head except in resurrection.  In His person it was all there, but it was not available for us save by death and resurrection
. There is the horrible pit and the miry clay, and then His feet are set on a rock: that is resurrection.
  The strict application of the Psalms is to Israel, but the principles apply to us.  The remnant learn that if Messiah comes to them, it is that they might be identified with Him.  The principle of double identification comes out all through scripture.  Hebrews establishes the same principle: He comes to our side, that we may go to His side.  It is a great thing for our souls to get hold of by the Spirit the thought of double identification.  If His feet go where my feet go, my feet must go where His feet go.

  That is the key to the understanding of this psalm.  Take Hebrews 2: 11.  The Sanctifier and the sanctified are all of one.  That is identification; we go to His side.  Then we get (v 14), “Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same”. 

J.W.B.  If God is to bless us He must bring us into suitability to Himself.

W.J.  What God has established in Christ is the security and ground of our blessing.  That is the point of this psalm.  Verse 5 starts this psalm.  “Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou hast done, 
and thy thoughts which are to us-ward”.  It refers to Israel, but has its application to us.  The thoughts of God could not be expressed in type.  Here in this psalm we get the One who takes Everything - out of type.  “Thy thoughts 
which are to us-ward”.  The happiness of the creature is to give the Creator His pleasure.  “For thy pleasure they are and were created”. 

J.W.B.  That is we are to be for God's glory and man has come short of that.

W.J.  Yes.  The principles are the same in their application to us as to Israel.  “Bringing many sons unto glory” is God's thought to us-ward.  Then verse 5 of Psalm 40 corresponds to Hebrews 2: 10.  It has been said that we have the universe of bliss suggested here in connection with one Man; but if you can get one Man, then you can get myriads of men.

J.W.B.  What is a universe of bliss?

W.J.  It is a universe in which God is revealed and perfectly responded to.  God 
all in revelation, and in all in response by the power of the Spirit.  The revelation and the response come out in the same Person.  It is brought out in one Man, and in that way the universe of bliss is suggested here.

J.W.B.  There will be a scene filled with the blessing of God.

W.J.  You get in Psalm 40 the Man in whom all is established, and in Psalm 41 you are told to consider Him.

J.W.B.  Why is He called the poor Man?

W.J.  We like a man who can assert himself, and he has wealth in the way of resource.  The poor man is the opposite to a man who asserts himself.  No man will praise a man when he does well for God.  Men will praise you when you do well for yourself.

J.W.B.  The poor man is akin to the meek man.

W.J.  Yes.  When we get God's Man, we get Satan's man in juxtaposition.  Read this psalm and John 13
.  You get God's poor Man, and then Judas.  Psalm 109 is the same, God's poor Man, and Judas, Satan's man.  Then God says to the poor Man, “Sit thou at my right hand”.  He is put at the right hand.  Psalm 110 is the answer to Psalm 109.  When Judas goes out then the Lord says, “Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified 
in him”.  We ought to love the Lord for that.  That is God's poor Man, who glorified God at infinite cost to Himself.  God's poor Man is glorified by God.  The life we have from Christ in its principle is a God glorifying one, and therefore the moral sequence is that we must be glorified: it must be glorified by God.  The sequence of things is very remarkable.  We have had the moral sequence of things brought out the last few years; that is the moral necessity of things.  In Psalm 40 it is the Head presented, and in Psalm 41 the blessedness which belongs to the Man who considers Him.  If I am finding the will of God down here then I am happy, but if not, then I am not happy.  Verse 12 of Psalm 41 is the key to the book.  “Thou ... settest me before thy face for ever”.  Therefore it ends with a doxology.

G.O.  He had found His Man.

W.J.  We have found our Head.

J.W.B.  It is like “he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever”. 

G.O.  It is the moral necessity.

W.J.  If our souls were on these lines we should learn things morally.  Mr Bellett said, You learn truth morally in the Psalms; you may learn it doctrinally in other portions of scripture.  Verse 8 (Ps 40) is the key and all the rest is the result.  If God’s law is within His heart, He must do things rightly.  Types and sacrifices could not set forth God.  Then He comes, and He says, “Lo, I come ... I delight to do thy will, O my God”.  He takes them out of type, and God's thoughts are set forth in Him.

G.O.  Israel was only a type of man.

W.J.  The first action of the life of Christ in you is according to verse 8; you love God.  We constantly think the action of life is in conduct, doing things rightly.  The first great thing is to have life expressed Godward.  We are so trained up in legality, and we get occupied with proprieties; but the first great action of life is Godward.  The source of life is the object of life.  We have not received life from Christ to be occupied with life in ourselves, but we have received life from Christ to be occupied with life in Him.  Life is Godward.  “The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death”.  What is that? To love God; and what is the law of sin and death?  To love myself.  The expression and action of life is very beautiful.  Christianity is a living 
spring of life Godward, and righteousness is the outcome.  Then you get proprieties.

J.W.B.  That is abiding in Him.

W.J.  Yes, it is.  Look at the three sentences, “he was manifested to take away our sins”; secondly, “in him is no sin”, and thirdly, “whosoever abideth in him sinneth not”.  Put these three together.

J.W.B.  What is abiding in Him?  What is that to you?

W.J.  It is, I am kept under His influence.  It is all a question of affection.  A flower abides in the sunlight, and therefore it reflects the light of the sun; the sun produces the colour.  “They shall see his face; and his name shall be in their foreheads”.  When you see His face then His character will be reflected.

Ques.  Has verse 12 reference to the cross?

W.J.  We do not get the cross here.  It is the cry of the victim before the altar, as Psalm 22 is the cry of the victim on the altar.

P.A.E.S.  That can be present - we see His face.

W.J.  Oh, yes; we behold His glory and reflect it.  Psalm 112 is “His name shall be in their foreheads”; Psalm 111 is 
“they shall see his face”.  His beauty is seen, and then the 
result is the beauty is reflected.  Work that out, and think of it.  I like suggestions.  It is beautiful to see in the Person of the Lord that He perfectly revealed God, and as Man responded.

G.O.  None but He could do it.

W.J.  It was important what came out as to the Headship and Lordship.  He was morally qualified for these official glories, but what gives strength to all is that He was the Son of God.  Christ has qualified Himself for Headship and Lordship.  It has been pointed out that Lordship and Headship come out in Acts 9, “Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?” 
 Here I am, Lord.  But in Acts 10 Peter had to learn that Headship involves 
“whosoever”. Peter went to college to be stretched out to the width of the sheet; he was too Calvinistic.  Our tendency is to be unbalanced.  The purposes of God are most blessed; but when you come to Headship, it contemplates everybody.  Across the great sheet you get whosoever written.  It is one of the most instructive chapters a preacher can read.

P.A.E.S.  How far do we carry the thought of double identification?

W.J.  Double identification is that He came to our side so that we might go to His side.  The “horrible pit” is our distance, Christ has gone into it; “miry clay” is our state.  He identified Himself with us where we were, and therefore we are to be identified with Him as the result in the highest glory.  In the sacrifices you get God beginning with the burnt offering, and ending with the sin offering.  In the latter, the offering is identified with the offerer; the fire of that goes out; in the former, the offerer is identified with the offering, and the fire never goes out.  Therefore you can never weaken your acceptance.  Then I see in this psalm the three things, faith, love and hope.  You get the same features spoken of the Thessalonians, “work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope”. 

  The Head was reflected.  In the Psalm it is all in Christ.  See the simplicity of Christianity.  These Thessalonians were set up in the true relationships, “in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ”.  Look at the simplicity of it!  People only converted three months, and yet see their state; there was moral space for God.  It was the universe of bliss commenced for God.  The disciples in the end of the gospels were looking for the public display of what they were in morally.

P.A.E.S.  It is very wonderful.

W.J.  We come under the impression of ministry; you like it because you have a life which answers to it, it stirs desires; but when you go away, what are you going to do?  We may refuse the light.  But am I going to be exercised by it?

G.O.  If you are exercised about it, you will pray.

W.J.  I know what it is to be fascinated by the truth, enjoying it as light, and yet not knowing the reality of it.  It is the call of the Lord at the moment; the light has been given; but we have not been exercised by it; we have not answered to it.

  “He inclined unto me, and heard my cry”.  He will answer me not according to my cry, but according to the cry of Christ.  In Psalm 22: 24 He says, “For he hath not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted; neither hath he hid his face from him; but when he cried unto him, he heard”.  I am speaking of identification.  The remnant will measure everything by Christ, and we are put on the same line.

J.W.B.  Where was the identification?

W.J.  If I was down in the depths He went there.  He was identified with the depths where we were.  So God will answer us according to the cry of Christ,

  It is interesting to notice that the second Book of Psalms begins with the falling barometer.  Then in Psalm 45 you get the Head, “Thou art fairer than the children of men”.  So Christ is the secret of the rising barometer.  We shall embrace our Head.  He is all I want to me.  Romans 7 is a great study - a man wanting to do a thing, and he cannot do it.  Then you must find your Husband, and you must admire your Husband.  We sever Romans 7 and 8 too much.  We are “married to another, ....  that we should bring forth fruit unto God”.  I am not called upon to look upon the expression of life in me, but upon the perfect expression of the life of Christ.  My Husband is my true self.

G.O.  It is not I, but Christ liveth in me.

______________________
  From ‘Truth for the Time’, 1903
  
THE PATH OF LIFE - PSALM 16
  I think we have in this Psalm what answers to the Meat Offering.  If led by the Spirit in your meditations, you get the “frankincense” here, 
this life was lived for God.  It is the 
food of God (Leviticus 21: 17).  All the frankincense was 
for God.  The FOOD of God! Now He says, I am ready for the altar.  You go on to the burnt offering (Psalm 40), and we all understand that the sin offering is Psalm 22.  

  It is helpful to read the first three verses of Hebrews 12 in connection with this Psalm to get the sequel to it.  The last of those verses takes in the 17th Psalm, the “contradiction of sinners against Himself”.  Psalm 16 is the 
Path of Life; Psalm 17, the path of Righteousness.  The last verse of each Psalm is characteristic, “Thou wilt show me the path of 
life” (Psalm 16: 11).  “As for me, I will behold Thy face in 
righteousness” (Psalm 17: 15).  We have the inner principle of His life here; the outside pressure is described in Psalm 17.  In the 11th chapter of Hebrews you have God’s picture gallery of men of faith.  You go from side to side in God’s picture gallery till at last you come to the bottom and see a Masterpiece - 
Jesus! “Looking off unto Jesus” - not as a Saviour there, “the author and finisher of our faith”, the great exemplification of faith.  We see the end of the pathway of faith in these verses, and it sets forth what we get in this Psalm.  

  Of course, you are on Jewish ground in the Psalms, but the principles of life are set before us, and they become illuminated if we bring the light of Christianity into them.  “There is a path which no fowl knoweth, and which the vulture’s eye hath not seen; the lion’s whelps have not trodden it”.  The moment you think of a “
path” you think of a way through somewhere.  There was no path for innocent man in Eden, he had just to remain where God put him, and there will 
be no path in heaven.  But now there is a path through this world, and 
that path was trodden by Jesus!  It is a path 
of faith alone.  Oh, if we got hold of it, “
There is a path” outside the human ken, no vulture’s eye hath seen it; outside the energy of nature, “the lion’s whelps have not trodden it”.  If we are Christians, we are called to tread it; it is set before us in this Psalm.  We should be charmed with it; the new man delights in it.  It is a great thing to see that the Lord has trodden it.  We see the end of the pathway of faith here, “Thou wilt show me the path of life
: in Thy presence is fulness of joy, at Thy right hand there are pleasures forevermore”.  We see in Hebrews 12 He has 
reached the “pleasures forevermore”, “is set down at the right hand of the throne of God”, and we are told to look off unto Him.  There is a path on which is shed heavenly joy and light, and if we have not that we are not pursuing this path.  The “frankincense” is here - the 
object of this life is GOD - a life lived to God.  God is the centre of this life.  He never departed from His centre.  It is the contrast to our life naturally, which has for its object man.  The first note struck in this Psalm is so sweet.  Oh, if we had hearts to rejoice in it! “Preserve me, O God”.  Oh, how sweet that is! If we look round on the children of men, I have got the same thing in me naturally; it is not in that - 
it would rather trust anything than God! What this must have been to God.  “Preserve me, O God, 
for in Thee do I put my trust”.  “
In Thee”, “In Thee”.  Do we start our day like that?  That is how He started all His days.  Not a bit of independence here.  He is the 
dependent Man.  This marked the life of Jesus - all that a man should be for God, while He was ever “
Over all, God blessed forever”.  “In Thee do I put my trust”.  He is a confiding Man.  The reason He is dependent, is He is confiding.  He says, as it were, There 
is no question in My heart as to your love.  
There was never a question in His heart as to His Father’s love.  That is the secret of the Lord’s sleeping in the storm.  At that time Jesus answered and said, “I thank Thee, O Father”.  When the storm was raging, the darkest point in the Lord’s pathway, in that way, John the Baptist doubting Him, the cities where most of His mighty works were done rejecting Him, what does He say? “I thank Thee, O Father ... So it seemed good in Thy sight”.  The pillow of Jesus is in Matthew 11.  Which is best, to have the storm cease, or to sleep through it?  We say, O Lord, just speak, make it to be a great calm, alter the circumstances.  God cares for us.  It is the finest thing that ever happened to a Christian to be 
shut up to God, where no creature can help you.  You are going to have some spiritual promotion, going to se
e how God can bring you out of a strait, or sustain you in one.  

  When Jesus left this world He left His pillow behind Him - the Father’s bosom! Often we find we have got our heads on hard pillows of our own making.  The Lord says, “Come unto Me, 
… and I will give you rest”.  I think we must notice the standpoint from which this invitation is given.  Where is the Lord at that moment?  He is in the place of 
infinite rest!  Oh, it is a place, too!  He says, “Come unto Me,
… and I will give you rest”.  I will teach 
you that you are loved as I am loved, and therefore My pillow is yours! There it is, in the blessed repose of the Father’s affections, unbounded confidence in boundless love!  He says, I am perfectly content with 
your appreciation, your knowledge of Me.  “No man knoweth the Son
, but the Father”, and I rest in your love, in your thought for me.  He puts His head on the bosom of the Father.  Then He says, “Come unto Me, 
… and I will give you rest”.  I’ll teach you what is in My Father’s heart.  I’ll tell you that the love wherewith the Father loves 
Me is the love with which He loves you.  
Loved as He is loved! that is rest!  The storm always
 found that blessed One at home.  
We are often driven home by the storm.  
I think as I read John’s gospel I hear Him saying, “I can wish you nothing better than what I enjoyed when I was down there on earth.  I leave you the best of legacies, 
My peace, what I enjoyed in the Father’s bosom.  

  If your will is silent you have unbounded confidence in boundless love.  Then the Lord says, not only “Come unto Me”, but 
keep company with Me.  Where?  In the Father’s bosom.  You take His yoke, keep close to Him, and learn His love.  Now you’ll bow.  We’d be glad to take His yoke if we got His portion.  What is His portion?  
The Father’s love.  
“For in Thee do I put My trust”.  He is dependent because He is confiding.  There is so much pretension to piety in these days.  You say your prayers in the morning and you say your prayers in the evening - it is not that, it is the
 constant sense of dependence.  

  Now we come to the first part of the second verse, a very important thing.  “O my soul, thou hast said unto 
the Lord, Thou art my Lord”.  He is an 
obedient Man.  He was here to obey.  “Thou art my Lord”.  I am down here to do Thy will.  Who 
“pleased not Himself”.  Absolute subjection and obedience.  The way to be happy is to be subject.  What makes me subject is 
knowing His love.  I believe He will do the very best thing for me.  The reason we are not happy is because we are not subject.  Turn to the 8th Psalm, “O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is Thy name in all the earth”.  The Psalm begins and ends like that, and between those verses you get the millennium, and everybody is happy, because they are subject.  The idea of the 8th Psalm is that everyone is happy because they are subject to Christ.  This helps me to understand what a Christian household should be, “O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is Thy name” 
in all my house.  
You cannot have the millennium anywhere but in your house; you can have it in this way: our children should be subject to Christ.  The husband is to be subject to Christ; the wife subject to the husband; the children subject to the parents; you cannot be happy unless 
you have this rule.  Here is God’s idea: the millennial earth all under the Lord, and because His name is excellent, everything is happy, even the fishes of the sea.  “Thou art my Lord”, 
the One who was absolutely subject, is the One to whom everything shall be subject!  It is a very sweet thought.  

  Then the next clause you have His lowliness, He is a lowly Man, “My goodness extendeth not unto Thee”.  That is rather a difficult passage, because we never forget that He was a divine Person, but as Man He says, “My goodness extendeth not unto Thee”, that was His perfection, to take that lowly place.  Then He says to the saints, 
All My pleasure is in you - IN You!  A very sweet thing to meditate on.

  He says two things here, “My goodness extendeth not unto Thee”.  He also says, I find My pleasure where you find yours, “To the 
saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all My delight”.  This goes along with the lowliness.  Lowliness is the mark of a spiritual person, as it says in Romans 12, “Condescend to men of low estate”, or as it should read, “go
ing along with the lowly”.  Jesus was a most lowly Person and always went along with the lowly.  It is the perfection of His manhood here; but we never forget as we contemplate it, that 
He is God.  Truly a Man
, as ever a man was, yet not ceasing to be God, and He abides a Man forever!  “The Son also Himself shall be 
subject… that God may he all in all”, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit all in all; but the Son is subject!  There is no room for the activity of the human mind there, we can only adore.  The Son Himself shall be subject! Subject all through - it belongs to Him as Man.  

  Now we get a very important thing in the next verse, what I should call “the salt” of the meat offering.  We must have the salt of the meat offering (Leviticus 2: 13).  We are often lacking in salt.  He was the 
separate Man; it is the salt of separation.  There should be no honey in the offerings (Leviticus 2: 11).  This is what flows as our nice 
natural friends, our nice ‘human nature’, and we lose power.  Here was One who says; No, I am separated to God.  No salt lacking here.  “Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another god”.  If you want multiplication of sorrows, turn away from God and you will have it.  There is much bitter sorrow, the fruit of turning away from God.  “He is the true God and eternal life.  Children, 
keep yourselves from idols”.  Anything that comes between our souls and God is in the New Testament treated as an idol.  “Their drink offerings of blood will I not offer, nor 
take up their names into my lips”.  I won’t touch it, I won’t take up their names into my lips.  I won’t 
think of them.  Let us look at this verse, let it judge us.  
The measure of your separation is the measure of your blessing.  
I believe that it is here that so many of us fail.  We don’t keep separate, we mix with people, and come down to their level, and we miss our joy.  
You can’t have communion if you are not separate.  
It is intensely interesting; in the 6th of Numbers the Nazarite separates himself from everything here, he lets his hair grow long - he is subject.  And what is appended to the law of the Nazarite?  You could not read these verses without desiring to know something about it.  “And the Lord spake unto Moses saying… 
On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel … the Lord bless thee and keep thee”.  But you must not begin there; you must begin in the earlier part of the chapter, you cannot come in at the end if you do not.  “The Lord bless thee and keep thee; the Lord make His face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee
: the Lord lift up His countenance upon thee and give thee peace.  And they shall put My name upon the children of Israel
, and I will bless them”.  “
And I will bless them”, and “I will BLESS THEM”.  Why should these words come just there?  It is the way God arranges His word for our instruction.  

  As I read these verses I say to myself, Who is it that enjoys this blessing that Jehovah proposes here?  The man who answers to the earlier part of the chapter.  Take the first book of Psalms and you will find who enjoys this blessing.  Psalm 4, “O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn My glory into shame?”  His glory was to be 
a Nazarite.  They say, you have got nothing by being a Nazarite.  “But know that the Lord hath set apart him that is godly for Himself
 … There be many that say, Who will show us any good?  Lord, 
lift Thou up the light of Thy countenance upon us”, that is it.  “
Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and their wine increased!”  “
Who will show us any good?”  How many are saying that.  Wherever you go you find people asking that question.  They look it, if they don’t ask it.  Every unconverted person is saying it, and every carnally minded Christian.  Who can give the answer?  The 
separate man can.  Why?  
He is in it; you cannot if you are not in it.  Here is one in this scripture.  He says, You want good, do you?  Here it is, in the light of Jehovah’s countenance.  There you are in the 6th of Numbers.  They say, But you have no “corn”, and “no wine”.  No, he says, but I have got something better.  He has no corn, no wine, - no 
earthly prosperity, but he has the light of Jehovah’s countenance, and he has “gladness more than in the time that their corn and their wine increased”.  The 4th Psalm sets before us Christ, really, and He is the separate man of Psalm 16.  In the 16th Psalm He has got gladness in His heart.  “Therefore My heart is glad” (v 9).  He is not a creature of circumstances.  We are such creatures of circumstances.  Here is One who is not; He is so in Jehovah’s favour all the day long.  Well, He is the separate Man, and the key to it all is, “Hear Me … O God of My 
righteousness” (Psalm 4: 1).  Psalm 3 is the secret of 
rest, Psalm 4 is the secret of joy.  In the 3rd Psalm they say, “There is no help for Him in God”.  He says, Yes, there is, “But 
Thou, O Lord, art a shield for Me, My glory, and the lifter up of Mine head… I laid me down and slept; I awaked; for the Lord sustained Me”.  Here we are in the 16th Psalm again, “Preserve Me, O God, for in Thee do I put My trust”.  The first verse of Psalm 16 answers to the 3rd Psalm, and the fourth verse of Psalm 16 answers to the 4th Psalm, therefore the 
separated Man is the satisfied Man.  He is satisfied, to put it in Christian language, with the light of His Father’s countenance.  

  You may be converted and go to heaven, but that does not suffice for satisfaction.  
God proposes two things in the gospel, as far as my need is concerned.  He proposes to make me happy in His presence - 
suitable to Himself, through the work of the Lamb - redemption, and He also proposes to make me happy in Himself - suitable to Him, and happy in Him.  
That is the 4th of John.  The Lord proposes to give the woman “a well of water”.  What a proposal!  “The water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water” - 
a capacity to know and enjoy God, the Father, and the Son!  
That is satisfaction, and mind you, you cannot worship without satisfaction.  
The next thing here is, He worships.  

  “I will bless the Lord”.  You can’t worship unless you are 
clean, that is Hebrews 10.  As far as Hebrews 10 goes, we have 
boldness to enter into the holiest; but that is not enough; there must be that.  The blood makes me fit for His presence, but there is something more needed to make me worship - 
a satisfied heart; an overflowing heart; that is the 4th of John.  You must have the 4th of John and the 10th of Hebrews together in order to get worship.  Jehovah is the relationship in the Psalms, but we have the Father in Christianity.  “The Lord is the portion of m
ine inheritance and of my cup”.  He is a satisfying portion.  Very few of us know the secret of good.  There are very few of us really 
satisfied Christians; it is evidenced by our worship meetings.  I suppose most of us could say something about the Lord.  You say, He has saved me, given me peace.  Very good, but what more has He done?  Has He 
satisfied you?  In the 72nd Psalm we read, “The 
prayers of David, the son of Jesse, are ended”.  That is it; he says, I can ask for nothing more; I am satisfied.  It is all Christ there, and he says, I have reached it.  He had the gratification of presenting the King after God’s own heart.  He says, God is going to have a King like that; that will do for me; I cannot ask for another thing.  “The prayers of David, the son of Jesse are ended”.  We sometimes touch that.  Do not misunderstand me, there is never a time when we can do without prayer, but there are times when you are so 
deeply satisfied that all you have to do is to praise.
  “I will bless the Lord, who hath given me counsel, my reins also instruct me in the night seasons”.  “His reins” - His thinkings.  This is very important.  What do you 
think about?  I would say to young Christians, I will tell you why you get floored so often; 
you don’t judge your thoughts.  
I believe there is a great deal of sin committed in thought.  
If we were filled with Christ we should not have such foolish thoughts; the mind must be filled with something.  The measure of your practical sanctification is the measure in which you control yourself there.  You never 
did a thing that you did not think about first.  You say, I was overtaken.  You had that in your mind first, and you should have judged it there.  People are talking about holiness all over the country, and it is the most shallow sort of thing - 
holiness begins inside.  
They tell you you must abstain from this and that.  That is not holiness - holiness begins inside.  Here, the Lord says, My thinkings instruct Me in the 
night season.  
The night season should be a very profitable season.  

  In the 8th verse, He is a Devoted Man.  
“I have set Jehovah ALWAYS before Me: because He is at My right hand I shall not be moved”.  That is the 11th of John; there you get the unmovedness of Jesus; you get it all along through John.  When He hears that Lazarus is sick He abides two days still in the same place.  Quietness is always a sign of power.  I don’t mean natural quietness, but a quietness of spirit, you can wait.  “He abode two days still in the same place”, and when He did move, the disciples say, You will be stoned.  “I have set the Lord always before Me, He is at My right hand, I shall not be moved”.  “If any man walk in the day
, he stumbleth not”.  His eye is single and His whole body is full of light in that sense.  “I have set 
Jehovah always before Me”.  He was the Object of 
His life.  That is the “frankincense”.  Look at the last verses of John 16; that sets it before us; verse 31, “Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe?  Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man 
to his own, and shall leave Me alone”.  
Every man TO HIS OWN.  “And shall leave Me alone, and yet I am not alone, because 
the Father is with Me”.  “Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God”.  That is how I understand this.  “We believe that Thou camest forth 
from God”.  He says, That won’t do, that is quite true; but I will show you the value of that belief, when trial comes you will go to your own.  
He says, you will leave Me alone, but I have got a circle of My own.  My Father is with Me.  
He is an overcomer, because He sets the Father before Him.  

  The right hand is quite a study.  In the 109th Psalm you read in the last verse, “He shall stand at the 
right hand of the poor”.  
In the first verse of the next Psalm Jehovah is saying to that poor Man, You come up to My right hand.  
“Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool”.  He is sitting there now, as the Author and Finisher of our faith, and we look there and see the end of the path.  He has reached the “pleasures forevermore”.  

  Then, verse 10, He goes right through, “Thou wilt not leave My soul in hell”, in a  disembodied state.  As we know, He was raised up 
from among the dead.  
He trusted God right into death, and He says, I trust Thee for resurrection; and resurrection is the vindication of the path of faith.  Resurrection is what I call the 
adjustment.  
“Who by Him do believe in God, that raised Him up from the dead, and gave Him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God”.  He “shall raise us up also by Jesus”.  The path of faith may lead us to the stake.  Here is the Lord going into death.  We do not get atonement here, we must go to other scriptures for that; it is the same death by which atonement was made; but here He is going through death trusting God to raise Him up and give Him glory as the vindication of the path of faith.  We shall all have joy in going to heaven, but who ever had joy in going to heaven as Jesus had!  He has passed through all that sorrow and shame and gone into that place where 
He will sorrow no more, that our faith and hope might be in God.  
“If ye loved Me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father”.  I go into “the south country” where there are no clouds!  I am going to My Father; if you thought about
 Me you would rejoice.  He will have joy there as none other will.  I put a question to you:  
Are you ready to go to heaven?  Would you 
like to go?  I don’t mean ready as washed in the blood, but ready 
in heart to go?  What a test!  You say, I am going to heaven when I die.  Yes, because you can’t help yourself! The Lord always had it before Him, and He was pressing on to it.  
Are you going to heaven - pressing on to it? 
____________________
  From ‘Words of Grace and Encouragement’, 1903
  
THE SWORD AND THE SACRIFICE
1 Chronicles 21: 1-30
  David had to choose between three things: either three years’ famine, or for three months to fall before his enemies, or three days to have the sword of the Lord and the angel of the Lord destroying throughout all the coasts of Israel.  David said: “Let me fall now into the hand of the Lord; for very great are His mercies: but let me not fall into the hands of man”.  He knew God better than he knew man after all.  It is a great thing to fall into the hands of God.

  Then there came an angel with a drawn sword.  The question has been raised by infidels, Where were the people in all this?  But the people had departed as well as the king.  Depend upon it, not only had the king departed from God, but the people had largely departed too.  They never really gave up idolatry; they held to it secretly, even in the days of David and Solomon.  It is natural to people to be idolaters; we are in the presence of it now, of Babylonish idolatry.  Roman Catholicism is Babylonish idolatry pure and simple, worshipping the creature more than the Creator, a piece of bread or the most blessed among women.  No doubt these people were suffering for their own sins as well as David's sin.

  There was the sword.  Listen: “It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment”.  There it is, like a sword you cannot get away from.  What Satan seeks to do is to divert you from that.  Young woman, Satan has succeeded in diverting you from thinking of the judgment of God by something of far less consequence; you would rather have a feather in your hat, or some companionship here, than the Saviour.  Judgment is hanging over your head.  “It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment”. 

  Here was a farmer threshing wheat.  He lifted up his eyes, and when once he had done that, it was all over with the threshing.  If you have never had your eyes open to see the sword of the Lord, I pray God you may see to-night.  Suppose you were bound to your bed to-night, and right over it a glittering sword was hanging by just a single thread.  Would it fascinate you?  Would you sleep?  No, no!  When God opens the eyes of a sinner to see the judgment, it is all over with business and 
pleasure.  Satan seeks to divert people from it, but the sword is there.  Ornan and his four sons hid themselves.

  David is a type in one way of the Lord Jesus Christ.  Of course, there he is, and he stands for himself, a poor sinful man, but the Spirit of God took him up to pen some of the most beautiful psalms - psalms that speak of Jesus bearing the judgment of His people.  Psalm 22 was written by David, where you get what Jesus felt on the cross far more than you do in the gospels.  David was the man used of God to bring forth that side of things.  In Psalm 22 it could not possibly be David speaking of himself, he is speaking of the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow.

  In our chapter we have him as a type of the Lord Jesus Christ, though all types fail.  What we find here is, he stands in the breach.  In one of the prophets there is a verse that runs like this: “I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it; but I found none”.  Some one must stand in the breach, and the blessed Lord Jesus Christ is the one to do it, David's son, and David's Lord because He is the Son of God.  In our chapter here, David says to God: “Is it not I that commanded the people to be numbered?  Even I it is that have sinned and done evil indeed: but as for these sheep, what have they done?  
Let Thine hand, I pray thee, O Lord my God, be on me”. 
  Think of Jesus.  He came down here and ever lived for the pleasure of God, traced His beautiful way under the eye of God, and established His title to live.  There was no stain of sin there, infinitely holy and absolutely perfect; and yet when He came to the cross there was the sword of judgment, there was the judgment we deserved.  “In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die”.  “It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment”.  Jesus stood in the breach; God found a man to keep out the plague - it was His own blessed Son.  On yonder cross He said: Let Thine 
hand, I pray Thee, O Lord My God, be on Me!  It is said in the Psalms that He took His people’s sins and called them His own.  He was perfectly sinless or He could not have done it.  Heavy was the hand of God on Jesus when He was on yonder cross.  Come here and learn what sin is by the sorrows of Jesus; see the holiness of God by the terribly bitter cry that came from His lips: “My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?”  Was there ever a cry like that, ever anguish like that?  “My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?  Why art Thou so 
far from helping Me, and from the words of My roaring?”  There is no answer.  “O My God, I cry in the daytime, but Thou hearest not: and in the night
 season, and am not silent”.  No answer.  Oh, was there ever sorrow like that?

  Can you measure the ineffable communion in which He dwelt here for thirty-three years, living in the sunshine and favour of God?  He never relieved a man yet but He felt it in His spirit, “Himself took our infirmities
, and bare our sicknesses”.  He could look up to heaven and sigh deeply; it was not an act of divine power simply, but He felt it all.  On He went, “a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief”; He could say, “Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests; but the Son of Man hath not where to lay His head”.  We see Him weeping over Jerusalem - poor Jerusalem! - sleeping that sleep of guilty indifference.  There, across that valley, behold the blessed Lord Jesus weeping in agony and praying more earnestly.  How hard man's heart is.  There were the people sleeping on!  They had witnessed all His mighty acts, seen all the goodness of God in that blessed Person, and He had wept over Jerusalem, saying, “If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto peace
! but now they are hid from thine eyes”.  

  Now in the cold midnight hour He weeps before the Father's face, “and His sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground”.  The cup was there, though He did not drink it there.  Satan was crossing His path and saying, 
‘If You go this way, You will feel my power’.  He brushes Satan
’s suggestion aside, and sees the Father's power and the Father's hand.  The flaming sword was there - the sword of judgment.  “If it be possible, let this cup pass from me”.  It was not possible; there was no other way of sheathing the sword.  He must go on to Calvary's cross, and there on Calvary's cross be numbered with the transgressors.

  Oh, that blessed Lord Jesus!  Did you ever trace Him?  What holy ground is this! He was nailed to Calvary's cross.  We are told in history, when prisoners were nailed in this way, how they writhed and cursed their tormentors.  
This blessed One never cursed His tormentors.  The soldiers must have been awe-stricken, and may well have whispered, 
‘Who is this?’  “He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter; and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so He openeth not His mouth”. 

  They nailed His hands to the cross, His blessed hands.  Think of your hands, man! God knows what they have done.  Think of what His hands 
had done: they had never been outstretched for Himself.  Take His feet; they will never walk here again; they were nailed to the cross.  Think of where your feet have carried you! Think of His hands, His feet! There they are uplifted.  Then His lips move: “Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do”.  He is with the Father still.  Is that Jesus?  Yes, that is Jesus.  “Father, forgive them”.  Perhaps they were touched for a moment, but now in cold-hearted selfishness they gamble over His clothes.  “They parted My raiment among them, and for My vesture they did cast lots”.  They were gambling over His garments in the presence of the sufferings of Jesus!  Poor, wretched man!  

  The bulls of Bashan come round and begin to taunt Him: they have got the Scriptures on their phylacteries.  
“He trusted on the Lord that He would deliver Him: let Him deliver Him, seeing He delighted in Him”.  Oh, that blessed Saviour!  He trusted God through all the agony of the cross, through the forsaking, through death; yes, He trusted Him all through.  

  “If He be the King of Israel, let Him now come down from the cross, and we will believe Him”.  He will stay there.  His disciples forsake Him, and then darkness comes, thick darkness, “Let Thine hand, I pray thee, O Lord my God, be upon me”, said David.  The 
hand of God was upon Jesus in that bitter hour.  Oh, David, if the hand of God comes upon you it will crush you; but it came on Jesus.  Twice over in Psalm 22  He says, “Be not far from me”.  Then He has to say at last, “Why hast Thou forsaken Me?”  Oh, beloved friends, I know why; He took my place, He bore my judgment, bless His holy name!  Do I love Him - love Jesus?  Why, of course I do.  He took my place.  The judgment I deserved fell on Him, overwhelmed Him in that bitter hour.  By that act He won my heart.
  
I have found people to love me here, and who would do anything for me; but He has done for me as no one else could.  We have to say to Him, 
‘O, Jesus Lord, who loved me like to Thee?’  

  He was the Altar and the Sacrifice.  David comes to Ornan, he had hid himself.  How can you go on threshing your wheat when the sword of judgment is over you?  May God open your eyes to see it.  When David drew near he came out of his hiding-place, and bowed at his feet.  Bow down at the blessed feet of Jesus the Lord to-night, Who has been to the cross as the sacrifice, and Who has sheathed the sword for ever.  It all speaks of Christ.

  David said to Ornan, “Grant me the place of this threshing-floor”, etc.; and Ornan said unto David, “Take it to thee ... I give it all”.  “N
ay”, says David, “I will verily buy it for the full price”, and he paid six hundred shekels of gold; on the threshing-floor he put the sacrifice.  Christ is both the Sacrifice and the Altar.  It was near the very spot where the ram was caught by its horns in the thicket.  That marks the beauty of Scripture.  “God will provide Himself a lamb”.  On that very spot this altar was built and the sacrifice was there: God accepted the sacrifice.  If God accepts the sacrifice the sword is sheathed for ever.  The 
accepted sacrifice and the sheathed sword is the story of this chapter.
  How does that apply to me?  I am going to tell you the best part of it now.  You cannot get resurrection in the type.  How do I know the sword is sheathed?  How do I know the sacrifice is accepted?  Because God has raised the One Who was the sacrifice and He is in the presence of God, a risen Christ.  The sword is sheathed for ever.  It is in the presence of God Who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead, and in the presence of Jesus Who was raised, that you know the sword is sheathed for ever.  It is not at the foot of the cross that your burden rolls away, but at the feet of the Saviour Who was on the cross.  The sword is sheathed for ever, and it is 
peace, PEACE, PEACE !
  That glorious resurrection morn
  Bids doubts for ever cease,
  For far and wide the news is borne
  Of perfect peace.
  The sacrifice has been accepted because the Person Who was the sacrifice has been raised.  Beloved friends, there is no other God but the God Who raised Him; and no other Christ to trust but the Christ Who has been raised.  You need to get into the presence of God Who raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.  He has accepted the sacrifice; the sword is sheathed.

_____________________
  From ‘Tidings of Light and Peace’, 1908

MORAL POWER
SUMMARY OF AN ADDRESS AT WIMBLEDON
  He who proclaims the word as in 2 Timothy 4: 2 is in the dignity that comes from the knowledge that that word will eventually triumph.  
Though, on the one hand, he recognises and accepts that what is of God is in reproach here, yet, on the other, be recognises that it must be triumphant in the end.  Every servant is below his testimony in one way; that is to say, he has far more light than has yet become effective in him; but still, if be is sincere, and is exercised on the line which the light indicates, be will encourage others to follow with him.  The point with us ought to be, how far are we governed by what we proclaim?  How far are we formed by what we speak of?  Are we in accord with the light we present?  The latter chapters in 2 Timothy are a moral answer to the testimony in chapter 1.  One feels often the lack of moral power with us; it is in consequence of where we are practically, of where our souls live.  If we are in the presence of God and the Lord Jesus Christ, what power there is in the word; how effective it becomes.  In Mark 1 the Lord enters into the synagogue, bringing with Him all the power of God, for He was with God, and the result is that evil is detected; He was with God, and the power of His service was marked by that.  So our service depends on where we are morally; power lies not in the amount we know, but in what we are.  We must be with God to be able to detect what is merely mental and what is moral; we need to be morally affected by the truth; and when it has truly affected us personally, then our word will be with power; evil will be detected, and it will be effective in good.  

__________________
  From ‘Mutual Comfort’, 1913
  
“THE APPLE TREE”
JOTTINGS FROM AN ADDRESS AT STREATHAM
9th January 1913
Song  of  Solomon 2: l-4; 8: 11-14

  The measure in which we love Christ is shewn by the way in which we answer to that in which His love has been most fully expressed, that is, His death.
  If we are not familiar with Christ in our individual pathway, we cannot be familiar with Him in assembly.  If we manage to do without Him during the week - and this is very bad management - we cannot quickly perceive Him in assembly: there must be moral condition.

  The Lord makes Himself known to condition, that you and I may know the shelter and satisfaction of “The Apple Tree”.  The apple tree is 
the covenant of grace.
  Intimacy with Christ is of the utmost value.  No one will ever know the sorrow of solitude as Jesus knew it; no one will ever know the joy of companionship  as  Christ will  know  it.  The apple tree answers to Habakkuk 3: 17, 18.  The banqueting house answers to Zephaniah 3: 17.

  One often hears the question, ‘Is life worth living?’  Life is worth living for His sake.

  He will love you into fruitfulness, but He must have the credit for all.
  Paul's desire was that Christ might be admired in the saints.
  There is a great deal of discipline because we keep Christ at a distance.  He says, 
‘I claim you by my suffering love’.
___________________
  From ‘Mutual Comfort’, 1913
  
NOTES OF ADDRESSES IN ILFORD
These notes were discovered in manuscript form; they have been reviewed for publication, but there is no record that they were revised by the author
THE KINGDOM OF GOD
10th June 1916
Luke 9: 18-36
  I have read this wealthy and interesting passage to help me in bringing before you the subject of the Kingdom of God.  It is my purpose to speak of that, and my point is, that, in the measure we have Christ as our Head we know what the Kingdom of God really is.  How is it produced, ... how it is understood and enjoyed we shall see as we go on.

  In the 11th chapter of the 1st of Corinthians the apostle there says “The Head of Christ is God” (v 3) and the Man Who has God as His Head proposes to become our Head.
  The gospel by Luke has a peculiar character and a fitting title would be, I think, “The Head of Christ is God”, for throughout this gospel we have set forth a Man who’s every action was swayed by God in all things.  He had God for His Head, and God would recover us for His pleasure in the life of that Man who had God for His Head.

  It is very important that we should know the truth of the Kingdom for it affects us individually and I have a feeling that we are defective there.  If we are not maintained in the truth of the Kingdom we cannot understand and enjoy the spiritual truths of the assembly.  The truth of the Kingdom of God touches us individually.  What is proposed for you in the Gospel is, not to go to heaven when you die, but to be controlled by Christ as Head now, and thus to be for His pleasure.  It is noticeable that none of the preachers of the Gospel throughout the Acts of the Apostles, speak of heaven as the goal - not one of them presents the Gospel in that way.  We must get rid of notions and be controlled by Scripture.  The spiritual thought is for each one of us to be set up in the knowledge of God here - to know God and to be supremely happy in spite of circumstances.  Undoubtedly, we shall be happy by and by but it is God’s 
thought for us to be happy now and not to be dependent upon circumstances for our joy.
  The Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.  That is what I see in the truth of the Kingdom exclusive to Luke and Paul and I think Luke illustrates Paul’s teaching.  I refer, of course, to one aspect of it.

  This is a marvellous passage that we have read; as a fitting title for it I would suggest, ‘The journey from the speculations of men to the appreciation of the Father’.
  The Lord is seen here in prayer and afterwards He addresses His disciples.  He turns and asks them a question which shows what was passing through His mind.  He had ministered to the multitude; He had fed them in their need, and now He wishes to know what they say about 
Him.
  Do their thoughts stop at what they had received from His hand, or do their thoughts rest as to Him?  He does what He does, and He gives what He gives, that we may know Him, and that constitutes our blessing.  Their need was met and now there are idle speculations as to whom He is.  Moses, Elias or one of the prophets.  How truly He has met the need - He has left nothing undone.  He has rendered you the greatest possible service.  Why?  That you might be able to sing with greater reality the verse that we commenced with:

  We love Thee for the glorious worth
  Which in Thyself we see. 
That is the end of it, not only to meet my needs, but that I may know Him.
  He is seen in prayer.  He that has God for His Head prays and the Kingdom of God is there.  The great end is dependence; thus, in the next chapter but one (11) 
we are taught how to pray and it is the Lord that teaches us.  You say, 
‘We have got the Spirit’.  Yes, but the Lord will teach us.  In this gospel the Lord is seen seven times in prayer and we have to learn the lesson of dependence upon God from Him - from the Man who had God for His Head.

  The Lord is seen in circumstances which sin had created.  He is weary, tired and in sorrow.  He is not in a garden as the first man was, where all spoke of the pleasure of God.  The first man in that environment gave all 
that up for Satan.  The second Man holds all for God in spite of untoward circumstances.  God has a Man who will have Him as Head in the very circumstances that sin had created.

  Throughout this Gospel, Jesus is seen as the dependent one in prayer to God in every circumstance, whether favourable or otherwise.
  It is an interesting study to trace it.  Seven times He prays, beginning at His baptism and finishing at Gethsemane.  He prays when the people would make much of Him; when His fame goes abroad and the multitude throng Him He retires to pray.  He prays when the attitude of the multitude is reversed and their hatred is shown.  “They 
have rewarded me … hatred for my love”; prayer is again His resource.
  Here He prays when He is neglected and His gifts put before Himself.  Immediately He goes up the mountain and prays and the fashion of His countenance was changed.

  Then He descended and teaches how to pray; and lastly, He prays in Gethsemane.  He prays in His sorrow.  He had God for every resource.  He had God for His Head.

  I simply mentioned those points as to prayer just in passing but I feel the importance of them.  While you may speak of the privileges of the assembly, remember, there is another spot where no stranger can intrude - you must have your own private history with God, you must not depend upon meetings only.  Bethany sets forth what you get there, but Bethany and the Mount of Olives are very closely connected geographically, and so must they be spiritually.  We cannot do without the Mount of Olives.  Power and communion will be seen by that.  You remember His prayer, “If it be possible, let this cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as Thou wilt”.
  
That is the seventh presentation of Him in prayer.
  If Christ is our Head, we shall be taught how to pray - we need to ask the Lord to teach us how to pray.  Then shall we be delivered from those mental recitals that go no higher than the roof.  
He will teach us.
  I go back to the passage we first read.  “There 
be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Kingdom of God”.  
They saw it in that Man.  Let us never forget that as to His own Person, He was God over all, blessed for ever.  He could not cease to be what He was because of what He became.  It is the perfection of what He became that 
we have here.  It was God set forth morally.  It could not be otherwise for He was governed in every movement by God.

  God-conscious and governed by God-consciousness - happy proposal; how little we know of it.  It would be a great gain if we are in even a small measure aroused to it.  It is in the measure in which Christ is our Head that we can be in God’s kingdom.

  I want to illustrate this by reference to four passages in this same gospel, in each of which the expression “at His feet” occurs and which show progressive apprehension of Christ as Head.
  The first is in the seventh chapter.  It is well known to you all: “a woman in the city which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat ... stood at His feet behind Him weeping
, and began to wash His feet with her tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head”.  That is the first introduction to Christ as Head.  The point is that you are taught to appreciate Christ.  I am sure, beloved brethren, the point of the passage is the way He endears Himself to us.  That is the start, the first note struck in her heart.  
She “wiped them with the hairs of her head”.  Her glory is all gone.  The first introduction to Christ is through His feet.  You understand me, “How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace
, and bring glad tidings of good things”.  
He evangelised God.  He is the vessel of the grace of God, and the Person in whom the blessing is, is endeared to you and you are awakened.

  What a contrast between the woman and Simon!  With him there was not a single pulsation towards Jesus.  He was living in the environment of selfish satisfaction.  This woman had reached a spot where you always find Christ.  
I am nothing.  She had affection for Him.

  Every young Christian listen.  This is the way of introduction to Christ - through His feet - through the glad tidings of the grace of God.  Then she hears the glad message, “Woman, thy faith has saved thee, go in peace”.

  In the next chapter she is seen in the company of those who had been taught to love Christ.  She is introduced into the circle of divine affections.  God give us grace to remember that 
He is the only bond, let that be powerfully maintained and happy will be the results.  That is the first way you are introduced to Christ - He is the vessel of the grace of God.

  In the eighth chapter we get another thought - it is the mind of the Spirit in presenting these things in this order - in the 35th verse it says they “found the man ... sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind”.  That is the next step - He that endears Himself to you subdues you.  This man was entirely under another domination but he is now found sitting at the feet of Jesus.  That is the place of subjection; happy subjection which is the fruit of affection.  The man is in restfulness, now subdued to Him.

  The you come to Mary in the tenth chapter - you know the passage well.  Now Martha served and Mary sat at His feet and received His word.
  
Her ear was opened to Christ.  That is the right thought for one who has Christ for his Head.  He not only subdues you but He teaches you.  Under that subduing influence He pours divine thoughts into her heart.  That is what we want.  Martha is cumbered about much serving - she is a type of the one in the seventh of Romans who is not free from the first husband.  Mary is set free.

  What always produced life in you is the enjoyment of the life as expressed in Him.  I could not say anything more important to you than that.  There is a helpful parable I sometimes use to express what I mean and to illustrate my point.  It is this: There is the sea out yonder and it sighs and moans, 
‘O that I might reach the heavens’.  So, the wind, willing to help, blew and blew again till the sea rose high.  Under the pressure of the wind the sea rose high and mounted up in huge billows, only to fall back again after the mighty effort was made.  Again, the sea sighed and moaned and again the wind exerted all its force, causing the waves to mount high up the cliff but alas, only to fall back again into the ocean.  Just then the sun shone out.  
‘Be still’ it said ‘and I will draw you up'.  
That is what we want - the shining of Christ and to drink in His glorious perfections.  The love which we enjoy in Him shall be seen in us.  There is no effort, the sea was marked by effort.  There should be energy, divine energy, but no effort.  We have the privilege of coming under His influence and it is to this end: that these moral features shall be seen in us and we shall be governed by what is suitable to God.

  How shall we pray?  His ear is opened to the cry of need, to the cry of sorrow, to the cry of woe.  I love to think of that.  The 68
th Psalm begins with the God of power, yet that is the God of the widow, the God of the fatherless.  He is cognisant of the solitary ones and His ear is open to the cry of distress.

  How sweet it is to pray intelligently, so often our prayers abound with “me”, “my”, “mine” where it should be “Thee”, “Thy”, “Thine”.  O that we might pray the right way up!  The Lord sets the example, “O Father which art in heaven”.  That is the start - God and His interests first.  I grant often with us it is otherwise yet He graciously hears our prayers, I quite admit it, but it is a very great thing to get the moral order as set forth in Luke’s Gospel.

  I have tried to show you that in the 7th chapter He endears Himself to you.  It is an affection which is not natural, it is engendered by the Spirit.  Then He subdues you.  Thirdly He teaches you by presenting Himself to you.  Last of all as the great climax, you get in the 17
th chapter what is greater than all these - you are effaced.
  “And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and with a loud voice glorified God, and fell on his face at His feet giving Him thanks”.  
That is the climax, He effaces you.  That is it - he was on his face.  He was effaced - he glorified God.  That is, he came into the position of God-consciousness instead of self-consciousness.  Christ effaced him - the Kingdom of God was reached.

  These few scriptures show the progressive apprehension of Christ as Head.  That produced the Kingdom of God.  This man would not go to the priests - they only stood for the Jewish system of law which was marked by demand.  God’s kingdom is marked by revelation.  Happy going back, one had discovered the Kingdom of God - Christ had effaced him.  These are very real things.  The spiritual man is the man who is effaced.  We think perhaps of a spiritual man as one who can expound scripture, unfold doctrine etc.  There is always too much of self-consciousness - I deplore it in myself.

  The Pharisees come at this juncture and demand when the Kingdom of God should come.  It is here in your midst and ye do not see it.  Sovereign mercy is there too, that is another mark of God’s Kingdom, but they do not see it - their religious environment kept them from it.

  As a climax to my address I desire three things, three hindrances which keep us back and account for, I think, our small knowledge of experimental things.  Three great hindrances to our practically entering the Kingdom.

  From this chapter regarding the Pharisees we pass on, after a dispensational parenthesis, to a parable (chapter 18).  In this, two men are presented as going up into the temple to pray.  I would have you understand that this is recorded for instruction to Christians.  I know the Gospel is preached from it and rightly so too, but it is for our learning.  The Pharisee stood up and said, “
I thank Thee I”. That resembles greatly the man in the other chapter who gave thanks, but put your ear close down to it and it is “I thank Thee I” etc.  The other man said, “I thank Thee 
Thou”, the self-righteous “I” shuts us out - it is the leaven of the Pharisees that spoils us.  The self-righteous “I” has no place in God’s Kingdom.

  Secondly, the ‘mental I’ has no place in God’s Kingdom.  Verse 15 goes on to speak of little children.  Let each stand here and learn the lesson.  “Whoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise enter therein”.
  
What is the charm of a little child?  It is its simplicity.  I have often grieved in watching a little child to think it must sooner or later lose its simplicity.  Have you a desire to enter God’s Kingdom?  You say, 
‘I do not understand it’.  
No but do you believe it?  Believe it and you will understand it.  In the outside world we understand and then believe but not so with God’s things.  Do not say, 
‘It is too deep for me’.  I do want each one of you to know these things experimentally.  Only as we have experienced things can we help others.  Gehazi put the staff on the face of the child.  He had for a long time been living in the presence of the testimony and yet the child never moved.  We want a ministry that is living.

  Thirdly and lastly there is the ‘I of acquisition’.  The young ruler (v 18 onwards) went away sorrowful for he was very rich.  Beloved young men, if you are set for riches beware.  It is not having riches that is the danger - not the possession, but the acquisition that is harmful.  Riches of course may be a snare also, they make you independent and able to carry on your own will.

  I wonder why it is we scarcely ever pray for people who are prosperous.  A brother prayed recently that those who had become suddenly rich through the war might be kept.  He was right, such people need far more grace than the poorer saints.  To be rich is to be in a place 
of danger.  The only way to be kept from the 
‘I of acquisition’ and all it involves is to be kept under the influence of Christ.
  Now as I close I would ask you not to try to remember all that has been said, but just to get hold of the little bit that is from the Lord for you.  May we each be kept under the influence of Christ that we may reflect His image.  God grant it for His name’s sake.  Amen.

  _____________________

ABIDING
17th June 1916
Luke 24: 29-31; John 1: 3-39; John 13: 23-25
  You will remember that last week I drew attention to the distinctive character of Luke’s Gospel.  It is extremely helpful to have the distinctiveness of each book before you in reading - it helps so much in regard to detail.

  The four Gospels present the Lord in very distinctive ways.  In Luke we have the presentation of God as Man; God is seen in a Man - that is the great idea.  In that true, perfect, holy humanity God was seen - as I said before, a fitting title to the Gospel would be, THE HEAD OF CHRIST IS GOD.  He was seen in circumstances which sin had created but was not moved by that in which He was found.  He had God for His Head.  We can never forget that though Man, He was still a Divine Person - Christ is God.  You cannot understand it?  No.  Nor reason about it?  No.  You can only leave the mystery of His Person, for if you could understand it you would be as wise as God.

  God has been pleased to come down to us in a Man - in Jesus the true and perfect Man.  So much false doctrine is floating about now, even among Christians, in regard to the deity of Christ, that one has to hold tenaciously to His divinity.  He never ceased to be what He was because of what He became but was perfect in what He became.  Luke presents Him in that way - in the perfection of what He became.

  The great thought is that God proposes to recover us to Himself in the life of that Man.  If Christians, we come under the influence of the Spirit to that end.  Luke’s Gospel always goes with Paul’s teaching and Paul’s doctrine consists of the great moral foundations of the Gospel of the Grace of God - the removal of one man in the death of Christ and the bringing in of another Man in the power of the Spirit.  That is it - and yet it is even refused by God’s dear people.  Blessed removal - God will recover you in the life of another Man.

  You remember the incident (2 Kings chapter 7) the young man lost the axe-head, it went down into the waters.  By the side of Jordan there grew a tree, which when cut down and cast in, caused the iron to swim - the axe-head came to the surface - it was recovered for the owner’s pleasure.

  Another thing in Luke’s Gospel is the priestly grace of Christ.  The Gospel begins with the Priest and ends with the Priest.  At the commencement the priesthood is in weakness.  Zacharias is in weakness - he is aged, there is barrenness - no child, it all figures the failure and breakdown of that system.  The Gospel ends with Priesthood, Christ ascends on high.  “And He led them out as far as 
to Bethany, and He lifted up His hands and blessed them, and it came to pass, while He blessed them, He was parted from them, and carried up into heaven”.  He went up into heaven giving the priestly benediction.  That was the last time they saw Him.  They saw Him in that attitude where He blessed them and so He was parted from them.  Beloved brethren, His hands have never gone down.  Two thousand years He has been exercising His priestly grace.  There is no departure there, He is Priest and Blesser.

  “He led them out ...”.  
If you will let Him separate you - but it can only be known in separation from the world and its principles - He will place His hands upon you in blessing, for His hands have never gone down and His heart has never grown cold.  We often sing of what His love has done, but what is He doing now.  He is active now.  His heart of love is still the same and desires that we may be drawn from religious formality to know Him and to prove the present activity of His love.  If we were all here in the power of that, what a blessed meeting we should have.  Oh the constancy of that love, every exigency of God’s people brings out His service.

  I have said all this by way of preface, my aim tonight is to show you, if I can, the difference between the two “abides” (Luke 24: 29 and John 1: 39).
  The hymn ‘Abide with me, fast falls the eventide’ is very familiar and very sweet.  I am not saying a word against that.  It was written by a godly minister 
in the parish in which I lived as a boy.  People speak of, and sing it, as if it were the acme of a Christian experience.  No doubt the theme is taken from these words in Luke’s Gospel.

  They needed Him - not that they knew Him - but He was one to sympathise with the lonely and sorrowing ones.  Their hopes were blighted, the shadow of death had fallen upon their spirits and their earthly hopes were dashed to the ground.  Death is 
very blighting.  It was His death they were thinking of - the death of Jesus, and they reasoned and were sad.  If you reason you 
will get sad.  The fruit of reasoning is 
always sadness but if you believe you will be glad.  Their sadness drew Jesus to them.  What will draw Him to you today is the sad countenance, the sad heart, cry of distress, the falling tear.  He is sensitive to it all.  He drew near to them and comforted them, though He rebuked the
m too, “O fools, and slow of heart to believe” and then He expounded the Scriptures to them.  That is not my point just now though much more might be said on it, so I hasten on.  
He abode with them.  It is sweet to have Him in your sorrows, sweet to have Him on your side when you are distressed.  He will come near - His heart is full of tenderness when we are in trouble.  He sympathises like no other for He has tasted every sorrow.  He can
1 come so near in our earthly troubles - He can say, “I have been there”.
  I thank God for all His mercies, His goodness, all the natural relationships of life which He allows us - how good God is.  Yet the blessed Lord knew nothing of them.  He had not where to lay His head.  He was the Man of Sorrows and directly your tears begin to flow His heart is toward you and He can say, 
‘I have passed that way’.  He was hungry and weary, He travelled all the way of sorrow, thus you can have Him nearer in your sorrow than in your joys.

  His sympathy is very real, and now, as I turn from it to the other Scripture, do not think that I would in any way belittle it, though I say we have something better.
  Let us come therefore to this ‘something better’ in John’s Gospel.  The “abide” in John’s Gospel is what I consider to be the culmination of His teaching.  You have divine love here working for its own satisfaction.  What the Son is to the Father and what the Father is to the Son and divine love working in order that we might be brought into a scene of rest of love - that we might be found in love’s resting place.  What I read in the first chapter is the whole thesis - it is the revelation of God to man in a Man, and God’s great end is to have man for His own satisfaction.  John exemplifies that in his person as I shall hope to show you.  Paul was an exemplar of what he put forth - he could say, “
thou hast fully known my doctrine, my manner of life” and in like manner John presents the great thought of his preachings both in the Gospel and in the epistles in his own person.
  John the Baptist had to render a testimony to the Lord; it was two-fold and very wonderful.  First “The Lamb of God
, which taketh away the sin of the world” (v 29) and secondly, “the same is He which baptiseth with the Holy Ghost” (v 35).  That is a very wonderful testimony.

  Christ, as Son of God, is great enough, by the power of the Spirit, to fill the whole universe with the blessing of God.  He will not only give the Spirit to you and me individually but presently He will fill the whole universe;  He does put away our sins and give us His Spirit but that is more in the verse preceding those I read.

  In verse 35 it says, “Again the next day after John stood, and two of his disciples; and looking at Jesus as He walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God”.  Notice the difference to verse 39.  Here it is a look of admiration - it is the person that attracted him not His work.  John was looking at the Lord and his heart was so charged with the greatness and the beauty of His Person that he exclaims “Behold the Lamb of God”.  It is always a true testimony that is rendered in the spirit of worship.  His heart was so full of what Christ was that his testimony is vital.  Alas that we so often hold the truth in terms and there is no vitality.

  John gives his testimony and his disciples left him and followed Jesus.  His mission was on earth with God but here was One come from heaven to bring heaven down to earth.  A vital testimony produced results - they left John and followed Jesus.

  (I will just say in passing that Paul’s doctrine puts you in heaven.  The apostle John always brings heaven down to you.  Paul in his teaching says, 
‘God is your Father’, John says, ‘Your Father is God’.  You will profit by the distinction.)

  They followed Jesus and the blessed Lord turned and saw them following and spoke to them.  If one soul desires to come nearer to Christ the Spirit will help you.  Alas, alas, how often we listen and still we are left where we were.  How many appreciate but do not follow up.  May the Lord fan the flame which may have been kindled by our meeting here tonight.  If one shall have come nearer to the Lord - I trust many more may - yet if only one, it will have been worth my while to come.  It is our heart that He desires.

  You may have heard the story before but I repeat it to help my point.  The father sat in his study when there came a tap on his door and the little boy Charlie appeared with a broken plaything.  
‘Please will you mend my toy?’  The father, a kind man with consideration for little children, 
stopped and mended the toy, sent the child away happy and then pursued his studies.  Not long after another knock came and the child entered, again carrying something that needed attention in his hand.  Again the damage was repaired and Charlie sent away happy.  Again, there was a tap on the door.  
‘What is it now Charlie?’  
‘I want to be with you, Father’.  
That is it, so he came and sat on the rug happy and contented to be with his father.
  May I use the illustration - I do so reverently - God will mend our toys, He will comfort our distresses, He will send us away happy.  But may the time come when we may say, 
‘I want to be with You’.
  The Father’s love the source of all
  Sweeter than all it gives
  The disciples say, “Where dwellest Thou?” and the answer is, “Come and see”.  There is a great deal of doctrine pressed into that statement.  You must be with Him, not bodily but in Spirit.  I would write those words over the Epistle to the Colossians.  It would be a fitting title for that is the doctrine that you get there - you leave earth morally to get heaven.  You are dead with Christ and risen with Him.  You come into a scene where you are prepared for heaven.  Do you shrink from this?  I beg you not to.  He will give us to see how earth is death-shadowed.  He will, with loving hands, undo the tendrils that bind you to the earth so tightly and He will set you free.

  It is not that you neglect anything here - you go back to those daily duties, but in the spirit of your mind you are free, these things do not govern you, you have priestly grace for the pathway down here.
  But, “Where dwellest Thou?” - “Come and see”.  
You shall be richly compensated for your loss here.  Happy Jacob, he said to Joseph, “As for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way
, when there was yet a little way to come to ... Bethlehem”.  It is but a little way to Christ in that deep sorrow of yours.  In that deep sorrow, how near He is.  How often the grave of our earthly hopes is the birthplace of our heavenly blessings.  This earth has too great a place in our minds.  I don’t ask you to neglect anything here but I do feel we are not free, we are not free in our spirits, we are so much detained by earth.  You will never be a spiritual man whilst earth has first place.  We perhaps think of a spiritual man as one who can talk about Scripture and bring our 
truth in a meeting.  We have ideas in our minds but they find no foundation here.  Are we free in our spirits?  Can we joy with Christ in His circumstances?  Do we know anything of that?

  The 13th of John is a wonderful chapter.  I might take up feet-washing in many ways and speak of the service, the spring of the service or the manner of it.  “He was come from God
, and went to God” verse 3.  O the grace of it, but that is not my point tonight.

  Then I might take the chapter up on other lines, the 13th chapter as following morally on the 12th - perfect testimony in the 12th and the close proximity of Jesus to the little circle in the 13th.  Yet Satan was there, flesh was there.  Satan and flesh are both there though they do not come out yet.  Is there, can there be a man there to betray the blessed Lord his Master?  Being three years with Jesus, did that not alter him?  He was in the same outward proximity to Jesus as the other eleven.  Alas, it is so - may it speak to each one of us tonight.  We may be outwardly in the right place, apparently in fellowship, probably taking the Lord’s supper, and yet in heart away from Him.  Not even the dearest earthly friend may know the state of our soul, but He is cognisant of it and sensitive to it.  There was treachery in their midst.

  Then again, I might speak of the chapter in connection with Peter.  There you have, not treachery as in Judas, but self-confidence, and weakness because of self-confidence.  Weakness and self-confidence go together, so do dependence and power.  But the Lord says to Peter, “I have prayed for 
thee”, otherwise it would have all been over with him.  Satan claims the fallen flesh of man and if not kept in the silence of the death of Christ, he will handle it to dishonour the Lord.

  I leave all these details tonight, although how one could enlarge upon each one of them, and pass on to John and the position he is seen in the chapter.
  Now John, with his feet washed is in the bosom of Jesus, not lying on the bosom but in.  He is in the bosom of the One who is in the bosom of the Father.  That is where he dwells.

  I have not gone into feet-washing tonight but I would just say it is for the defilement of earth.  There are many things which defile, almost unconsciously, many things which perhaps your conscience cannot take cognisance of.  For instance, you come home wearied from the city and 
go to the prayer meeting.  Your feet are washed by the sweet sense of love you find in the company of the saints.  There are many other ways, I cannot go into them now.  John was in the bosom of the One who was in the bosom of the Father.  Sweet spot.

  Now a question is raised and none of the disciples know the answer.  “Who is it?”  Why did Peter not ask?  Ah! it is the one in the bosom of Jesus who will have all questions answered.  There is no question left unanswered if you are in communion.  We run here and there to get our questions solved, we seek advice from this or that neighbour.  This last two years has exposed us all and has shown how much we were resting on circumstances, and how much more we were detained by earth than we thought we were.  We have sought advice from others and have become bewildered.

  John with his feet washed asks the question, lying on Jesus’ breast.  He was in the bosom of Jesus and now he leans on Him, that is, I don’t lean on my own understanding but I rely on Him.  
‘Lord, You tell me’.  That is very beautiful - you cannot ask if you are not there, and you cannot be there if you are not washed, feet washed I mean.  All questions are answered on the bosom of Jesus.  There you are able to receive divine communications.  That is my point in taking up John as illustrative of his own teachings.

  Secondly, you are energised by divine love.  Now in chapter 20: 4 it says, “So they ran both together 
[Peter and John] and the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the sepulchre”.  You see, the second, energised by divine love, outran the first.  So shall it be “Yet went he not in” v 5.  “Then cometh Simon Peter following him and went into the sepulchre”. 
  
Beloved brethren, you need not think the Spirit records these details without intent.  You are
 energised by divine love2.
  Thirdly, he was reverential.  Love always makes you that.  Peter rushed by - impulsive Peter - John halted.  There is liberty in divine love that is not licence.  There is amongst us, I feel, a great danger of being unconsciously irreverent - we don’t mean to be I know.

  Fourthly, love recognises the Lord.  The 21
st chapter is an appendix to the Gospel by John.  It is the last thing the Spirit wrote, later even than the Revelation.  I thank Him for it.  Where should I be?  Where would any of us have been if it were not for that chapter?  “On this fashion He showed 
Himself.  Simon Peter saith unto them (some of the disciples) ‘I go a-fishing’  They say to him ‘We also will go with thee’”. What is the result?  Night, nothing, nakedness.  That is always and always will be the result of going away from the Lord.  They went out into the wild waste of waters.  It is a sad thing to be away from the Lord - a sad and wearisome thing to take things into one’s own hands and leave the Lord out.  But if you don’t go after Him, He will come after you.  The Lord speaks and acts and John says, “It is the Lord”.  He was the first to discern that and he tells Peter and it moves him.  Peter’s heart was right at the bottom but it was drifting.

  Have you known the sense of distance?  Have you come to the meetings as a mere form?  Has there been backsliding in affection?  Have you still taken the Lord’s supper and it has not meant to you what it used to do?  The people that you live with may perhaps not know - nobody knows - but you know and the Lord knows.  There is no act of public backsliding but what has been preceded by a long private backsliding.  The Lord would spare you the publicity - He would recall - He is so tender.  He will speak again and again and again in many ways.  You find the Bible irksome?  You have little interest in the Scriptures and prefer light reading?  Is prayer neglected?  LISTEN!  CHILDREN HAVE YOU ANY MEAT?  Answer that dear young Christian.

  When Peter got to the shore he saw there was a fire of coals.  In effect the Lord says, 
‘You want to keep warm by the world’s fire, Peter, now come and warm by my fire’.  He will probe you and will warm you.  Come and warm by His fire and get right.  It all has to come out.  “When they had dined
, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?” “Thou knowest that I have affection for Thee”.  Again He asks him.  He had first warmed him and then He probes him.  How clumsy we are.  I was much impressed by a dear old brother whom I accompanied on a visit to another brother who had backslidden.  He knew the case very well and had great affection for the man but was received very coldly and one could see the brother was very much hardened.  He spoke to him on these lines, 
‘Twenty years ago you gave up that for Christ, and that, and that and that and now you are spoiling it all’.  It was very lovely, he narrated the beautiful things in him through the grace of God.  The stiffness was gone and he was broken down and recovered to the Lord.  May the Lord give us grace and skill to handle one another in that way.  Peter says, 
‘I admit it all, Lord.  You know all things.  You 
know that I love you.  You know the love that is in my heart - you know you put it there
’.  
Peter is recovered to the Lord.
  My fifth point in regard to John is that he followed.  “
He saith unto him.  Follow me.  Then Peter
, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following”.  
It is in the power of divine love that we follow - the one who loves is the one who follows.
  Lastly, when Jesus was on the cross He saw John standing there and to him he committed His interests.  “When Jesus therefore saw His mother
, and the disciple whom He loved, He saith unto His mother, Woman, behold thy son!  Then 
saith He to the disciple, Behold thy mother!”  
That is, I commit my interests to you.
  I would like you to consider these six points in connection with John.  It is a pathway open to each.  When the feet are washed there is a place 
on the bosom of Jesus and in the bosom of Jesus where all questions are answered.  You are energised by the power of divine love, you are reverential, you discern the presence of the Lord, you follow and then all the interests of the Lord are committed to you.  May we each know something of it 
in our practical experience.  May the Lord bless this word.  Amen.

_____________________
  
THE HOLIEST
24th June 1916
Hebrews 10 : 19-25, 35-39
  As I have said on previous occasions, I repeat now, that all my addresses are spiritual lessons.  I do not stand here as an expositor of scripture - not that I say a word against that (we have our Bible readings for that purpose and scripture must be carefully expounded) but my object is that the truths with which we are very familiar may be put into practice, that what we learn as truths we may experience in a practical and experimental course otherwise it will be of no use to us.  I say this for the young, there are many present here tonight and my desire is that you may make progress and not be diverted from the path.  There is a great difference between the glory of title and the joy of possession - the greatest possible difference - and very often we run away with the thought that we have possession because we have the title.  We may indeed have very great joy in that and think we really possess.  Of course, where there is title there must have been faith - where there is possession there must be continually a divine work; exercise will be produced and by that, I mean desire and prayer.  That being so, the things we have title to we really possess.  I think the distraction will be helpful for there is a very great deal we know we have title to which we have never taken possession of.  Now I will try and illustrate my point having the young especially in view.  I come into a large estate; a fine mansion standing in its own extensive grounds and at the entrance a charming little honeysuckle lodge.  I am charmed with this latter place, it is a very pretty spot and I enter it and take possession and am quite contented.  One day I am asked, 
‘Have you been up to the house?’  It is two miles up through the wealth of trees.  
‘No, I have never been.  I am quite content in my honeysuckle lodge
’.  
I have title to all but I have only got as far as the honeysuckle lodge - don’t you see?
  I come now to my subject, which is an excessively important one - the Holiest, and the way in which we are affected by - two very large subjects.  There is the Holiest in relation to our coming together and on the other hand there is the Holiest in regard to the ways of God with us down here.  The key to the position lies in a sentence I am about to give you and I pray you may be affected by it.  This is it: 
Distance and silence are unbearable to God.  We have all had to suffer the fruit of departure and distance and with these come also destitution and degradation.  Those four things, hateful to God, are set forth in the story of the prodigal.  We have all had to feel the sorrow of that state of things.  All the sorrows of this world are the results of distance from God; such things could not exist in His presence.  A time is coming when every sorrow shall be removed.  He will wipe away all tears and He will be greater in wiping away tears than in creating a universe.

  Distance and silence are unbearable to God, therefore He came in from His own side to remove the distance and break the silence.  What a blessed God He is!  He loves to have His creatures near Him.  There was the hunger of the prodigal but on the other hand, there was the hunger of the father’s heart for the boy.  It is a great thing to have that thought before your heart.  The father says, “I miss him - I will have him back” not to be reinstated to the position in which he was but to something far better.  The Father takes the opportunity to show the largeness of His heart.

  Let us return to our subject of the Holiest.  What I have said in regard to the prodigal is beyond the Holiest.  You get the Holiest set forth in the Epistle to the Hebrews.  This epistle was written to people who had been in relationship with God outwardly but now had come into Christianity - they had left the shadow for the substance.  They had come into this vast system which stood in contrast to the old and which can only be understood by those that have the Spirit.  You are not cognisant of it by your senses - it is all known by the Spirit and the Epistle to the Hebrews was written to show the superiority of the New over the Old.  That was the object of its being written.  And since we are in the presence of a Judaised 
[system] - Christendom, I mean - the Epistle to the Hebrews has a loud voice for us now.  If this epistle were properly understood it would be morally impossible for anyone to be a Ritualist.  The sacrifice has been “once offered” - not twice; that would destroy Romanism and Ritualism.  Don’t think I am speaking against persons, I am not - it is not persons but the system I deplore.  The Epistle to the Hebrews, if rightly understood, would deliver from that state of things and therefore I beg you to pay close attention to the passage that I read.  (The sacrifices are dealt with in previous chapters.)

  In the old system the way into the Holiest was not made manifest - the veil was up, which kept God in and shut man out.  There was distance, and the reason was this - man was under probation and as long as that is the case he must be kept at a distance.  But when the substance comes the shadow disappears.  Christianity is another system entirely - the veil was rent and God came out to man and man went in to God through death.  Now God and man come together through the efficacious death of Christ.  “Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus ... through the veil, that is to say, His flesh”.  (vv 19, 20). Now I ask you to consider this passage.  The former part of the chapter shows the glory of the Person, His work, His position, and because of that you are invited to draw near.  The nearer you come the more happy you are and the nearer you draw to God, the more you realise that the silence is broken - you 
must praise Him.
  Now how do we draw near?  The first thing I need in order to draw near is a purged conscience - that is that everything between your soul and God has been divinely met.  A purged conscience is the fruit of the death of Christ.  If you have not that, how can you happily draw near?
  
You would be disturbed.  Now what is the meaning of a purged conscience?  My conscience took cognisance of guilt to bring me into judgment - my conscience said, “You are a sinner responsible to God” and it created a very great disturbance in my soul.  I thank God that for 49 years my conscience has never taken cognisance of sin as bringing me into judgment.  My conscience marks time with the present value of the blood.  While I say that, let me preserve my subject.  My heart is now awakened to a new love, thus my conscience is no longer cognisant of sin as condemning me, is kept tender by love to Christ.  It is not the thought of sin now as bringing me into judgment but my conscience works now in the power of affection.  I realise in some measure what sin is as having brought Him into judgement and in the measure that I realise that I realise that it becomes abhorrent to me.  I am a Christian now.  I love Christ.

  Are you established there?  If not, you cannot know anything of the Holiest.  Who can tell me what sin is?  Who can tell me what the consequences of sin are?  He has come to bear all the consequences and in the power of affection alone I learn what sin is, as I see what it meant for Him to bear it all.  The marvellous efficacy of the blood of Christ!  That efficient sacrifice!  And if you are a simple believer in the work of Christ you are seen alone in the value of that.

  First then, there is the blood and secondly there must be a “new and living way”, and the third thing is the great Priest over the house of God.  These are the three points here and we are encouraged to draw near and find our home with God.  There must first be the removal of sin but there must also be a new and living way.  If I am to find my pleasure in God I must know that He finds pleasure in me.  It is in another Man that we draw near to God - in the life of another Man.  In other words, “Bring forth the best robe etc”.
  
I want to have him near Me in suitability to Me, don’t you see?  Ask the prodigal about his ring, his shoes, his robe.  
‘Yes’ he would reply, ‘I know, I know, but what a father I have got.  I never knew I had such a father.  He is most blessed
’.  
That is worship.  What a sweet thing it is.

  If you draw near you must be in suitability.  His way in is your way in - it is affection that carries you and makes you follow.  Then there is the Priest - He is the administrator of all the blessings of the house of God.

  What is the Holiest?  What shall I find there?  What is involved in that word?  In another part of the epistle it says, “Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need”.
  
At the throne of grace you receive help in time of need.  The Holiest is where you receive divine communications - there you are in the presence of the glory of God and in the light of another world.  What a wonderful thing!  Christ is the expression of another world to which I belong.  Would to God we knew it better!  “Send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them bring me unto thy holy hill and to thy tabernacles, then will I go unto the altar of God and unto God my exceeding joy etc”.  (Ps 43: 2-4).  God is your exceeding joy in the Holiest.  It is what He is, not in relation to you but to Christ.  Have you ever been there?  You say, 
‘Is that open to me?’  Yes, to every Christian.  I don’t know how you are going to get through this world if you are not in the light of another world.  We are invited to “draw near”.  The first two chapters of this epistle are the Holiest.  God said of the Holiest in the book of Exodus, “There will I speak with thee”.
  
The second chapter is more the ark of the covenant.  The Holiest and the mercy seat are both in chapter 1 - the light of another world shines there.  Keep those points in mind and you will find them very helpful in reading this epistle.  The blood is there on the mercy seat; let us draw near in the efficacy of that blood, of that work.  His death has removed all defilement.

  “In full assurance of faith”.  
What is that?  My heart is assured of the love that won the victory.  Notice how the verses follow in beautiful succession:


  Verse 22 - “Let us draw near”  
      
That is inside
  Verse 23 - “Let us hold fast”  
      
That is outside
     Verse 24 - “Consider one another to provoke unto love and 
    
good works”.       
      
That is the Christian.
  I have been into the Holiest and I come out to hold fast and then I consider others to provoke to love and good works - I look upon my brethren, not in the light of any social worth but as they stand in the estimation of divine Persons.  If it were so continuously, what a great difference it would make to our meetings.  I come out of the Holiest and find every saint beautiful in my eyes, as they are in God’s.  I would raise my hat to King George and give honour to those in authority but the weakest saint on earth is more precious in the sight of God than any earthly potentate as such.  Remember, had we not known Christ we should probably not have known one another.  That is the only possible link we have with one another - there must be none of these intrusions.  I consider you in the light of the sanctuary and so I shall not provoke your flesh but I shall provoke you to love.  And how shall I do it?  By loving you.

  There would be a great deal of recovery if we knew more of this.  We want spiritual power and we want to consider one another more in this way.  It is intensely individual.  You come from the Holiest carrying an atmosphere with you.  It is not the meetings, though it is felt there and we contribute to the happiness and prosperity as we are in the spirit of the Holiest.  You have been at the meeting and the Scriptures have been illuminated for you?  You have felt the power of the word?  Yes, and the reason?  We were in the power of divine love.  That which is merely mental is absolutely ruinous.  Your measure of spirituality lies in loving the saints and caring for them - it does not consist in standing at a desk and talking to them.  There are far more spiritual ones oftentimes among the listeners.  I do not judge any man but I do feel that we confuse spirituality with gift.  Your spirituality is measured by your manner among the saints and such an one contributes to the assembly far more than the gifted one.  I am not underrating gift - if rightly exercised in divine love it works mightily.  My greatest comfort in coming to address you is this, oftentimes feeling my inability and weakness the Lord says, 
‘They love Me and I love them’.  
It is the sweetest thing possible to speak to people who really love the Lord.  Gift is valuable, it has its place but 
the spiritual stature of the one who ministers must correspond with it.  The father has a beautiful coat and his boy admires it, and there it is trailing in the dust.  We need stature to carry our gift and stature lies in the knowledge of divine love.

  Paul, that blessed apostle, could say, “I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved”.  (2 Cor 12: 15). When I consider the Apostle’s stature how small I feel in the face of it.  In effect he says, 
‘You may despise me and slight me but I will love you more and more and more’.  
Besides the ‘slighting’ side I think we are apt to err on the flattery side.  Our blessed Lord and Master never slighted or flattered any one.  He never made a wrong judgment.  May we be preserved from the two extremes, then shall we pursue our way provoking one another to love and good works.

  We have spoken of the Holiest - we are there inside with God.  Then we come out with men - you get that at the end of the chapter.  There is always the opposition of the will of men but “the just shall live by faith”.
  
How are you going to behave in relation to the outside?  By accepting all that Man puts on you.  How can you do that?  By first going inside.  Then you learn your destiny - you will then come out and bow to the will of that Man.

  To illustrate this point I have often told the story of the late Queen Victoria when she was but a child of ten years of age.  One morning being very self-willed, her governess put before her the table of succession and for the first time she found that she was nearer to the throne than she ever thought.  As the truth dawned upon her she looked earnestly up into the face of her governess and said, “I will be good, I will be good”. 

  In the light of your destiny you learn the reason of your education.  If you live in the light of your destiny you accept discipline.  God permits man to do what he does to educate him.  If we realised this there would be no cry of 
‘Had it not been for this ... or that ...’.  
No, we are not creatures of circumstances.  In the same epistle, in Hebrews from which we read, we find these early Christians taking joyfully the plunder of their goods.  Why?  Because they knew that in heaven they had more enduring substance.  How would you like your goods spoiled?  Could we take such things joyfully?  It was the will of God for them and it proved to them the reality of their Christianity.  Never take anything second-hand.  The 
Holiest will help you - that is the key.  If you are there you will accept the will of God for you here and will never think of second causes.

  How we waste our time!  How little we make progress!  Why are you left here?  Why did the Lord not take you when you were first converted?  Why did He not take me forty nine years ago?  Are we left here to make a fortune?  Am I left here to make a cosy nest for myself?  You are left here to be educated for your destiny.

  Read Psalm 73.  The opening verses show the foolish and wicked prospering, the unrighteous man flourishing, the ungodly and the corrupt walk through the earth oppressing and full of pride.  “When I thought to know this it was too painful for me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God
; then understood I their end”. (vv 16-17).  That is where you get understanding.  You could never envy anyone here if you could consider what a marvellous destiny is yours.  Accepting the education - that is our difficulty.  Why do you hanker after this or that?  Leave it to God.  Don’t try to make an easy path for yourself.  I tell you, you will be disappointed and spiritually blighted if you take things out of God’s hands.

  Psalm 66.  “For Thou
, O God, hast proved us: Thou hast tried us, as silver is tried. Thou broughtest us into the net; Thou laidest affliction upon our loins, Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads ... but Thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place”.  (vv 10-12). If you are in the Holiest you will be prepared to receive education in the nature of discipline by the hands of men.  There are many other ways also, but I must not stop to speak of them now.  You see that building yonder being erected?
  
There is a huge scaffolding around it - yes, it is very ugly and unsightly, yet it is necessary it will be taken down and then the building, the glory and pride of the architect and builder, will show to perfection.  A silent and blessed work is going on now which will be all to His praise and glory.

  You may say, ‘I don’t understand the ways of God’.  
No, very likely not.  God is always thinking of your destiny and is working accordingly.  He is working with that great end in mind - He will explain all by and by and it will be a vindication of Himself.  Shall my heart say in that day, 
‘It could not have been otherwise’?  It shall.  He will vindicate His ways with me and in regard to His ways with me, my heart will say, “It was absolutely necessary.  I had to pass that way.  Quite necessary that I should experience that sorrow or that trial”. 

  Now, “The just shall live by faith”.  We are to hold on, not to cast away our confidence.  We are to live by
 faith.  That quotation is from Habakkuk and it is three times quoted in the New Testament, in Romans, Galatians and here in the Epistle to the Hebrews.  Habakkuk is a remarkable book and I will just give you a brief sketch of it in closing.  It is undated - nobody knows when it was written.  It is the experience of a man of God in a day of trouble and ruin and is on that account psalm-like in character.

  Verses 1-4 of the first chapter give the burdens of Habakkuk the prophet.  There is spoiling and violence, iniquity and grievance, the law is slacked and judgment gone.  And Habakkuk cries and gets no answer.  From the 5
th verse onwards God says, ‘Habakkuk, you are perfectly right, I will destroy them’.  
And the prophet answers, “We shall not die, O Lord, Thou hast ordained them for judgment; and, O mighty God, Thou hast established them for correction”. 
  Then a doubt came into the prophet’s mind.  
‘The people you are using Lord are morally worse than the people you are disciplining, I cannot understand’.  
Look at chapter 2.  “I will stand upon my watch
, and set me upon my tower” (that is the Holiest in principle).  And what does he see?  In his deep sorrow he goes to enquire of the Lord, and the Lord answers him by giving him a vast outlook upon another world.  God is bringing in another world and “It 
will surely come, it will not tarry”.  And he is to write the vision and make it plain upon tables “that he may run that readeth it”.  The light of another world will make you run through the world.

  Next Habakkuk begins to preach, “the just shall live by faith”.  In chapter 3 he prays - it is the prayer of Habakkuk upon Shigionoth.  The chapter ends with singing.  Shigionoth denotes the wind instruments.  Negionoth is the music of the stringed instruments - it figures Christ.  As sure as you play on Shigionoth you will play on Negionoth.

  Notice the order - he weeps, he watches, he preaches, he prays, he sings.  A beautiful climax.  “
Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive tree shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.  The Lord God is my strength - He will make my feet like hinds’ feet
, and He will make me walk upon mine high places.  To the chief musician on my stringed instruments”.  (vv 17-19). The stringed instrument is the heart that has learnt to value Christ and because of that, produces a sweet note of praise.  It is not the recital of truth, not remembering certain pamphlets, good though they may be.  What is acceptable to God is the heart that overflows.  John overflowed.  Let us speak well of Christ, let us sing on the stringed instruments.

  Now I realise I have taken you over a very large tract of ground this evening but don’t be downhearted, don’t say, ‘I can never remember all that man said’.  
Get the little bit that is meant for you.  I can’t tell you what will serve you but the Lord can impress it upon you.  He can make a little go a long way.  I would like you to leave this meeting sensible of these things - If I know nearness to God I shall learn my destiny and I shall accept my education.  You say, 
‘I cannot understand many things that happen about me today.  Why must I take part in that which I would like to be free of?  Why is this war allowed?
’  Oh, the questions that arise in our hearts!

  The necessity of it all lies in the unreality of God’s people - the war with all its terrible consequences has fallen upon countries professing to know God.  Take our own country - God has been patient with this country for long enough.  Think of the pleasure-seeking, self-seeking, God-forgetting.  Don’t find fault with God - the mischief lies with ourselves.  I feel, very many feel, these times are very trying naturally, yet they are a splendid opportunity for Christians to prove the reality of what they have believed.  May the Lord stir us up to wait for Him.  His coming cannot be far off.

  The Lord grant it for His name’s sake.  Amen.

_____________________

THE SECRET OF JOY
1st July 1916
Psalm 90: 1-2; 91: 1-4; Matthew 11: 25-30; Luke 10: 17-22
  I want to show you tonight, If I can, the secret of rest and the secret of joy.  Those are two points I have on my mind this evening and I am sure the Lord would have us to know rest on the one hand and joy on the other hand.  Though it is so, and these are things that we as Christians should be familiar with, yet I am very well convinced we are very much strangers to them - we do not bear the marks of restfulness and joy as we should.  I have read these few scriptures to illustrate the spiritual lesson I wish to speak of tonight - the secret of rest and of joy - and as I travel round amidst Christians of all kinds I find sadly enough very few are in these two secrets.  The line we generally take is, we shall be happy by and by - we have these things in hope.  That is perfectly true, it will be so, it must be so then.  When the presence of Christ is reached we shall be in unalloyed joy but we want to know the NOW of these things.  We sing of the sweet by-and-by and in many of our hymns anticipate the time of rest and joy to come.  I am not finding fault with the hymns - many of them are very beautiful - but the Lord is saying, by the Spirit, “I want you to be happy now, I want you to be restful now, I want you to know the joy now”.
  
We need to know the now of it.  I hope the few scriptures I have chosen may lead to exercise so that this end may be gained and we may indeed know more of these things in the present.

  In the Psalms we have Christ prophetically, in the Gospels He is there in person.  The Spirit of Christ was in the prophet David when he wrote and so we see Christ in all the Psalms very largely.  I will come to detail presently but first will just rapidly give a brief sketch of the book.

  In the Hebrew version the book of the Psalms is divided into five separate books (Psalms 1-41; 42-72; 73-89; 90-106; 107-150).  Each ends with “Amen” and the first four books have distinct subjects - the fifth is a recapitulation of the other four.  The book of Psalms took a period of, roughly speaking, one thousand years to write.  Though they are commonly spoken of as Psalms of David, David wrote only about half of them.  Some were written prior to David’s time, others many years after he was dead.  The Spirit of God inspired them all, but the one hundred and fifty Psalms cover a period of one thousand years - they go from the 
time of Moses to that of Ezra - and not only were they indited by the Spirit of God but they are put together with marvellous arrangement and skill.  There is a marked spiritual design and nothing gives you a greater sense of the inspiration of the Bible than an insight into the marvellous design of this book.

  The 90th, 91st and 92nd Psalms go together and form a preface to the fourth book - that is well to understand, it is full of teaching for us.  Psalm 90 is the prayer of Moses the man of God.  It is the first Psalm that was written.  I give my judgment here, I would not be dogmatic, but my judgment is that the Psalm was written in the circumstances recorded in the 14
th of Numbers where God’s earthly people refused to enter into the land and they were told that their carcases should fall in the wilderness.  It is a chapter of disaster and failure and they fall under the government of God.  In that chapter is says, “As truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord”.  God says, as it were, 
‘I have to punish you for your failure but your failure cannot thwart me’.  God cannot be thwarted.  He works out His will in spite of all.  That is a great comfort in times of perplexity - in the presence of the disaster and pressure of the present moment God is working.  God is behind everything and above everything and can turn the most untoward circumstances for the working of His will and the blessing of His people.  Therefore the hearts of Gods dear people can be at rest - I speak now of what is national and of what is world-wide, and as to it all we should be exercised but not under the power of things.  Don’t be depressed, be serious but don’t get under it.  We should not wonder at these things happening.  If we were near to God we should only wonder that they had not come before - such sad departure.  But God is above all and behind all and He is turning it all to His own glory.

  Moses writes this prayer when in the circumstances recorded in the 14th of Numbers, that long chapter of disaster.  Listen, what does he say, “Lord, Thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations.  Before the mountains were brought forth
, or ever Thou hadst formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, Thou art God”.  (vv 1-2). I am particularly fond of that - I cannot tell you what a comfort it has been to me.  
He remains the same.  Your blessing lies not in what you can be to God, but what in God is 
unalterability.  “From everlasting to everlasting - Thou art the same 
– “Thou art God”.  
God is God - He remains the same, and our blessing lies in what He is.  When Moses was first told to go to 
the children of Israel, after his sojourn in the wilderness, he said to God, “Behold, when I come unto the Children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you, and they shall say to me, What is His name?  What shall I say unto them?  And God says to Moses, I AM THAT I AM ... I AM hath sent me unto you”.  (Exod 3: 13-14).  God says, 
‘I remain the same’.  You may not at the moment see the beauty of that word but God may flood your soul with the light of it some day when you want it.  God’s earthly people never reached it but they will by-and-by in fulness of blessing on the earth.  When the blessed Lord was here He said, “Before Abraham was I AM”.  The blessed Lord - the Jehovah of the Old Testament - had come down and was seen in Jesus our Lord.  “Jesus 
Christ the same yesterday, and today, and forever”.  
That is the Rock of Ages.
  If I have to learn, as I must, what I am, if Moses was used of God in that way (the law came by Moses) it is to introduce me to Jesus, the I AM THAT I AM.  What a magnificent thing to get the power of that in our souls.  Don’t reason about it - there is no room for reasoning here - bow to it.  You would be as great as God if you could understand it.

  I will now sketch Psalm 90 in a little more detail.  It proceeds in verses 3-12 with the cry of what man is - it is the cry of Moses - it is the cry of the man who has forfeited his title to live.  The law said, Do this and thou shalt live.  But man has not done it and he dies.  In verse 12 he begins to pray.  “So teach us to number our days
, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom”.  
The he goes higher still, “Let Thy work appear unto Thy servants” - higher yet - “And Thy glory unto their children.  A
nd let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us”.  
That prayer is not answered yet.  Moses prayed for the future - he prayed for the world to come.  Will there be a time in the history of this world when there will be no intrusion of death?  If the beauty of the Lord their God is upon them will they die?  No - it is not possible.  Moses’ prayer stops there but it will one day be answered.  What is the bottom of all the confusion in the world today?  It is that people love themselves.  They do not love the Lord their God with all their soul and their strength and their might - they do not love their neighbour as themselves.  That is very evident.  Why do you lock your door at night?  There are thieves about.  Just men don’t love God with all their hearts but one day they will.  “All the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord” - not the glory of England, nor of France, nor Germany or Russia, but the glory of the Lord will fill the whole earth.  Moses’ 
prayer is going to be answered.  The moment you come to Psalm 91 you get the answer to Moses’ prayer in 
Christ.  God has one answer to your sorrows and your tears and your prayers, one absolutely perfect answer, Christ.  I should like you to get hold of that thought.  On the mountain of transfiguration Moses and Elias saw Him glorified.  Moses, you wept many a tear over Israel, you bore the burden of My people on your spirit for many long years - here is the answer to it all.  Moses was a wonderful man.  On one occasion, you remember, he said to the Lord, “Blot me
, I pray thee, out of Thy book”, but let Thy people go.  
He said, “I will go up unto the Lord, peradventure I shall make atonement for your sin”.  
No Moses, you are not great enough to make atonement.  On the mount of transfiguration Moses was there and Elias was there.  They were together - the leader of God’s people and the would-be restorer of God’s people
, two blessed men, and as it were the Lord says, ‘Moses, you were shut out of the land of Canaan but you are in the land now with Jesus’.  
There is the answer to all his prayers.  Would that we had hearts to take it in, or that we could get clear of theology and the notions of men.  I grieve as I see Christians cheated out of their rightful inheritance by the thought of man.

  Psalm 91 is prophetic of Jesus.  It starts with a proposal, “He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty”.
  
Most High, Almighty - by those two names God was of old pleased to reveal Himself.  In verse 2 another voice speaks, it is Jesus.  It is Jesus in incarnation.  “I will say of Jehovah, He is My refuge and My fortress, My God, in Him will I trust”.
  
Jesus accepts the proposal in verse 1.  We must ever remember the Lord never ceased to be what He was because of what He became but He was perfect in what He became.  It is the perfection of what He became that I am dwelling on now.  Every true Christian would hold that in his heart, and rather than give it up would die for it.

  In verse 2 therefore, Jesus steps forward (I speak with reverence) and takes the place.  He steps forward in His humanity to that secret place under the shadow of the Almighty and of His God.  The three names: Most High (maker of heaven and earth), Almighty and Jehovah are put in this remarkable Psalm.

  In verse 1 therefore we get the proposal; in verse 2 the proposal is accepted and in verses 3 and 4 the Spirit speaks and shows us the consequences following the proposal.  Put your ear close to it - “Surely 
He shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler and from the noisome pestilence.  He shall cover thee with His feathers and under His wings shalt thou trust” etc.  That brings me to my subject - that is the spirit seen in Matthew 11.  In the Gospel the blessed Lord was here in true perfect humanity.  The fowler is Satan; his snare has been tried in the temptation in the wilderness.  The Lord has been hungering forty days with all the true and proper feelings of a Man.  Don’t reason about it, don’t bring in His divinity to weaken it.  Jesus was hungry and Satan came and said to Him, “If thou be the Son of God command these stones to be made bread”.  Satisfy your hunger.  No, He replies.  It is recorded man shall not live by bread alone but by every word of God shall he live.  If it be God’s will for me to be hungry, I am satisfied.  The blessed Lord is in the circumstances which sin had created - He came here to taste it all, the hunger, the weariness, but He was perfect in all.  Magnificent words these, “In Thee do I put my trust”.  Do you not love Him?  He was in the environment of the secret place - absolute dependence and obedience - and though Satan went around he could not touch Him.  What a defeat!  Spoiler of our race, has he insinuated to 
you that God is not good?  Do you think God is not good in holding something back from you?  What is natural to us is to distrust God - all other sins are the result of that.  Here was One who trusted God and Satan could not touch Him.  Why?  Because He was dwelling in the secret place.  Magnificent defeat!  Unreachable by Satan!  The spoiler of our race was foiled by the obedience of a dependent Man.

  Verse 4.  “He shall cover thee with His feathers and under His wings shalt thou trust”.
  
Let us turn to Matthew 11, and may we know the warmth of the feathers tonight - we need it badly.  Matt 11: 35.  
“At that time Jesus answered ...”.  Answered what?  The circumstances in which He was found.  At that juncture He could answer and say, “I thank Thee, O Father”.  And what were the circumstances?  He was not successful - His ministry to Israel was refused and He was rejected.  In the words of the prophet Isaiah chapter 49 He was saying, “I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought and 
in vain”.  (v 4). Yet 
at that time the blessed Lord gives back the reply from the warmth of the feathers, “I thank Thee, O Father”.  Doesn’t He stand in contrast to John the Baptist, blessed servant that he was, at the beginning of this chapter.  John the Baptist is in prison and he cannot understand why the Lord does not intervene - but supposing it was God’s will for him to be there?  He never 
was set free you remember, his head was the prize given to a dancing girl - she danced for it and she got it.  Could the Lord have intervened?  Do take this home.  Are you in untoward circumstances?  Is there much you cannot understand?  Is there sorrow?  Are you put on a bed of sickness?  It is to chasten your spirit and do you good.  I have seen some of the happiest Christians I know in a home for incurables in London.  As to their bodies, they were in all sorts of pain and misery but in the midst of their bodily afflictions they were glorying in Christ.  How God is glorified in them!  I thank God for the remembrance of such people.  Truly it is better to go to the house of mourning that the house of feasting. (Eccl 7: 2)

  Jesus answered and said in the midst of all the trouble, “I thank Thee O Father ... Even so, Father for so it seemed good in Thy sight”.  
We are often found away from home and the storms drive us there.  Jesus was always anchored there.  He was always at home - He never had to be driven there by trouble.  “He shall cover thee with His feathers”.
  
How God loved the Man who trusted Him.  Man was not made like the beasts, but put on his feet to look upward and to say, “In Thee do I put my trust”.
  
The moral dignity of man is to trust God; his degradation is to distrust Him.  Man does not naturally trust God - it is the fruit of the lie of Satan.  But why should you not trust Him?  What evil has He done for you?

  Dear Christians, we are all under the wings of protecting love, but it is another thing to nestle under the feathers.  Every Christian is under the wing, so to speak, but how many of us know what it is to be in the warmth of divine love?  “Even so
, Father” etc. that is the warmth of the feathers.  That is it, there is no will there, the only thing to silence your will is the warmth of the feathers.  In the warmth of divine love you are content with the approval of God and there is no hankering after the approval of other people.  
‘I am content with your knowledge of me’.  
It is individual communion with God that we want.  “No man knoweth the Son
, but the Father, neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him”.  “Come unto me”.  (Matt 11: 27, 28). That is the key.  “Come unto 
ME . . . and I will give you rest”.  
Weary saint?  Yes, and weary sinner too.  Come into the warmth of the feathers.  I will teach you the Father loves you as He loves Me.  That is rest.  Rest is known in the Father’s love.  Does He love me as He loves Jesus?  Yes, He has said so - “and hast loved them as Thou hast loved 
me”.  
Those are indeed waters to swim in (Ezek 47: 5) that we were speaking of the other day.
  “Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest for your souls”.  
Why is the yoke easy?  The Father’s love makes it so.  The secret of rest is learnt in the Father’s love.  Is there anyone here with a peculiar sorrow?  Has the voice of death made itself heard in your circle?  Hear the voice of Jesus speaking over the wild waste of waters; Come unto ME and keep close to ME and I will teach you the Father’s love and ye shall find rest.  How often we are driven home by these things.  Never so, the blessed Lord.  Circumstances only brought out the perfection of what He was.  How the last two years have exposed us - don’t put it aside, don’t shrink from the exposure - it is a great thing to know our state before God.  We are finding out that we are not so close to Him as we thought we were.

  Now turn to Luke 10.  Here we get a remarkable contrast.  The circumstances are entirely different and yet the Lord uses the same words, “I thank Thee
, O Father”.  In Matthew the words were uttered in the presence of rebuff and rejection, His mission was unsuccessful.  The context here is absolutely different.  His mission is successful, prosperity marks it.  The Lord had sent the seventy out two by two.  (You get in the early verses of the chapter the true marks of a servant and how he is to behave and the spirit in which he is to carry the Gospel - all very helpful and should be studied by anyone wishing to serve the Lord.  But I do not dwell on that.)  And the seventy return to the Lord rejoicing at the wonderful power which He had conferred on them so that even the devils were subject through His name.  They were impressed by that.  The Lord diverts them from it - after all it was power of destruction - and turns their attention to the administration of good.  “R
ather rejoice becauseyour names are written in heaven”.  
That was to say, your blessing is heavenly.  Then He looks forward in spirit to what we get in Revelation 21, “I 
beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven”.  That has not yet come to pass.  We must not be governed so much by present things.  Christ was looking forward and speaking prophetically and what He saw was this, in the heavens, (there are three distinct heavens, this I need hardly say is not the third heaven, the presence of God) where Satan is influencing the world for evil, God’s dear people are going to be, to influence the world for good.  This is a sad war?  Yes, but what lies at the root of it all?  It is glorification of man, and where does that emanate from?  Through pride 
Satan was turned out of God’s presence - surely the spring is there.  Satan and all his power is to be done away with in Revelation 21.  The heavenly Jerusalem is seen coming down out of heaven having the glory of God.  The prayer of Moses could not be answered without the church.

  The blessed Lord looks up and rejoices in spirit.  (That is the only place where it says He rejoiced in the Spirit.)  And why?  He saw His mission would be successful.  He saw the triumph of good over evil.  He saw there would be a response in happy hearts as to the results of what He would accomplish.  If God destroys evil, it is to put something better in its place.  The secret of joy is the administration of good.  The heavenly city comes down “having the glory of God
: and her light was like to a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal; and had a wall great and high, and had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names written thereon, which were the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel.  On the East three gates
; on the North three gates; on the South three gates; and on the West three gates”.  (vv 11-13). The gates are for the administration of good and from them flows out the goodness of God.  The secret of all unhappiness lies in self-occupation - self-love is the root of all unhappiness.  It is the story of the Good Samaritan we spoke of on Sunday night.  He pours in the oil and the wine.  The Good Samaritan brought love from the top to where self-love was at the bottom.  The love of God delivers me from self-love and makes me think of others.  What is the cure for self-love?  He has given us the Spirit.  Has He put the love of God in our hearts?  Do we love God with all our hearts?  I am sure we are defective there.  Self-occupation, self-interest, thinking always of self.  
‘What will you do for me?’  Oh that we might be set free to minister to others.  Oh the blessedness of thinking of others - of loving God with all your heart and your soul and your mind and your strength, and your neighbour as yourself, and there will then be on your “East three gates” and on your “West three gates” nothing but the administration of good flowing from you.  It is a practical thing - it is not preaching.  Would you like to be like that?  The spring of all true service is, “I love”.  The Hebrew servant (Exod 21) is the type.  He said in his heart, “I love ... I will not go out free”.
  
That is the picture of Jesus the true servant.  The living spring of all that He did was love and that is the secret of joy.

  Please consider – ‘You do something for me’.  
I would like this or that - all that is the product of self-centred love.  Would you not like to be free?  The Lord rejoices in spirit as He looks forward to this time of 
administration of good to the myriads of happy hearts.  If I think of the future - what delights - I shall never think of myself once.  I shall never have a thought for myself.  That is unalloyed happiness.  I shall be occupied with Christ.  I shall be in the presence of God, 
‘Like Him to know that glory beam unhindered face to face’. 
  Unfallen angels are those who have never thought of themselves.  They were not jealous at Christ’s birth, they 
suddenly broke forth.  They could not help it, they must give the acclamation, “Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, goodwill towards man”. 

  The spring of happiness and the spring of praise is in forgetfulness of self.  It lies in dependence, not in myself but in God.  When my mother was alive I did not go about saying, 
‘I am trying to love my mother’.  That would have thrown discredit upon my mother.  If I spoke like that people would have said, What kind of mother can she be?  No, I loved my mother, I was a poor helpless babe.  Morning, noon and night she tended me.  The spring of unwearied service lay in her own bosom.  She was the source of it and soon my little heart came to respond to it.  My mother loved me into loving her back again.  No-one could call my name like my mother.  And why?  Because she could put affection into her tone like no-one else.  “My sheep hear my voice”.
  
I love you.  “Mary” - who could say “Mary” like Jesus?  God proposes to love us into our loving Him back again.  A grand proposal, would we accept it more readily.  “We love Him because He first loved us”.
  
You cannot love God by trying.  I can no more help loving God than I can help breathing.  Would to God I loved Him a thousand times more.  Every Christian loves God even though that love may be covered up by a lot of rubbish.  The source of it is in Himself.

  Now in conclusion I would just say, once again, don’t try to remember all that has been said.  I would like you, however, to carry away these two thoughts which have engaged us this evening; the secret of rest is in divine love, in the warmth of the feathers, and the secret of joy is in the administration of good.  God has been pleased to be good to you that you might be good to other people.  “Go and do thou likewise”.
  
In ‘doing likewise’ is the secret of joy.  May the Lord bless the word for His name’s sake.  Amen. 

_____________________


APPREHENSION OF OUR GLORY LEADS TO DISCIPLESHIP 
6th July 1916
Mark 8: 10-33
  I have read this scripture wanting to speak of it especially in regard to the blind man.  You will have noted in all my addresses I have kept very much on individual lines but I feel that is the line very much needed.  I may perhaps later be led to speak of that which pertains to Christians in the company, but the company, after all, is made up of individuals and our corporate condition depends on our individual walk.

  Our spiritual lesson tonight is this, that the apprehension of our glory leads to discipleship.  You may not understand that statement at the start, but I hope to make it clear to you before I have done.  We cannot be in the path of discipleship apart from knowing our glory.  That is what is before my mind tonight and the incident of the blind man recorded here, and only here, will help me to develop my thought.

  There are two blind men to whom sight was recovered mentioned in the Gospels - this one in Mark and the other in John and I need not say the thing is not repeated.  There is a distinct difference between the two and the difference is this, the blind man of John has his eyes opened to see the Person of Christ; Jesus says to him, “Dost thou believe on the Son of God?” and he replies, “Who is He
, Lord, that I might believe on Him?”  Jesus saith unto him, “Thou hast both seen Him
, and He it is that talketh with thee”, and he said, “Lord, I believe.  A
nd he worshipped Him”. (John 9: 35-38)  We have in that account his progressive apprehension of Christ.  He was turned out of the synagogue, they made him an outcast, but at the last he became a worshipper.  That is characteristic of the Gospel by John: all the signs in John are given to show the glory of the Son of God - the blind man saw it and he became a worshipper.

  Mark’s account also has a distinctive character.  In Mark you never get the assembly or church as you do in Matthew; Mark is occupied very largely with the subject of discipleship.  Therefore this blind man gives character to this Gospel.  I will briefly give you the context that leads up to it.  The Lord had fed the multitude and He crosses the sea and “the Pharisees came forth
, and began to question with Him, seeking from Him a sign from heaven, tempting Him”.  
They didn’t know what they were asking, for if the Lord had given them a sign to meet the case it would have been judgment.  “There shall no sign be given unto this generation”.
  
The Sign was there in their midst, the lonely Jesus, but they had no eyes to recognise Him.  Very well!  There was no sign to be given and immediately He leaves them and goes over the waters again
.  From that time there is a definite break with that generation.

  When in the boat, the Lord instructs His disciples.  He warns them against the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Herodians.  In Matthew He warns them against the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.  Mark the accuracy of Scripture and the beauty of its detail.  The three warnings are given and what do they mean?  They present man in three aspects:

a. What he is religiously
b. What he is mentally
c. What he is politically.
And that is man, not only as God sees him but as we know him to be in ourselves.  Here it is religious leaven and political leaven put together; but they do not see the moral force of the Lord’s remarks.  They think of their material need, “They reasoned among themselves saying, it is because we have no bread”.
  
They were the loaf the Lord was speaking of but they were too much taken up with material interests to understand the spiritual thought imparted to them.  The blessed Lord says, “Have you forgotten?”  It is very touching.  The Lord reminds them of how He fed the five thousand and then the four thousand.  These disciples were very much like the Pharisees in spirit - there was affinity between them and that nation they were leaving.  The Lord recalls to their memory those two miracles.  The feeding of the five thousand with twelve baskets of fragments gathered up is perfect administration through man - that refers to Pentecostal times.  The feeding of the four thousand with the seven baskets of fragments refers more to Remnant times - that is those times in which we live.  In a sense it is the breaking up of the church - we do not see full administration of blessing, but I would rather be here now than at Pentecost (not putting aside, of course, God’s will is best for each one of us as to where we come in the stream of time).  And why?  Because in the miracle of the seven loaves there is the divine sufficiency of Christ to all who look to Him. (Seven is the perfect number and four the universal 
number.)  What a comfort in the present broken up state of things - the fruit of the will of man - we have Christ and He won’t fail us.  He will greatly bless you!  
Now is the time to prove the divine sufficiency there is in Christ.  He will prove it to be so if you but come to Him.

  Just one lesson before I pass on; the Lord says, ‘Now don’t you remember?’  How often it is when we are in distress that He comes in.  He hears our prayers, He answers our distresses, He soothes and relieves us.  Now, if through that exercise you have not a better knowledge of God the thing has failed.  When the joy of deliverance is over you will forget.  Why does He allow these things?  Could He not spare us everyone?  He allows them that I might have a better knowledge of Himself.  That is the gain of going through a trial with God.  
They soon forgot.  The point was, Jesus was there and what could He not do.

  Now we will look at the incident of the blind man.  It is full of remarkable detail - all these incidents are given to teach us spiritual lessons and therefore they are full of instruction if we can but see it.  Why is this incident introduced just here?  It is because 
they did not see, they did not understand. The blind man shows why it is and that is why the Spirit brings it in just here.  Here is this blind man and the Lord is going to bless him and the first thing He does is to remove him from adverse influences.  “He took the blind man by the hand and led him out of the town”. (v 23)  This blind man represents the disciples’ state.  Though they companied with the Lord when here they had not, as yet, received the Holy Ghost and they had not as yet the ability to look up nor to see.  “How is it that ye do not understand?”  When the Spirit should be given they would see all things clearly.  Beloved Christians, we often ask the Lord to bless us, we are constantly thinking of our needs down here.  However in His grace and goodness He does most wonderfully consider us - assuredly He does - but that is not His great concern.  His greatest care is for your soul.  As to our bodies, He won’t let us lack anything - God cares for the fifth sparrow, that is the one that is thrown over - but He is working on spiritual lines.  He has our destiny in view.  He would draw us from influences here.  To be withdrawn, to be laid aside in weakness or sickness, to have some deep trial which perhaps almost stuns you at the time being, these things are often the forerunners of great blessings.  What are you after?  Is it soul prosperity you are seeking?  That is the only thing that can make you truly happy.

  You remember the incident in 2 Kings 4 of the woman who cried to Elisha in her deep need, saying, “Thy servant my husband is dead, and thou knowest that thy servant did fear the Lord and the creditor is come to take unto him my two sons to be bondmen”.  
What does Elisha say to her?  “What hast thou in the house?”  And she replies, “Thine h
andmaid hath not anything in the house, save a pot of oil”.  
Now after she had borrowed many vessels, what was she to do?  She was to bring her sons into the house and shut the door - a very happy thing that man was excluded and God was there.  She is there with her pot of oil and her deep need.  If the door is opened or half opened the clamour of man will intrude, the voices of men will confuse.  How often the Lord lays us aside on a bed of sickness maybe; it is that in the rest and stillness His voice may be heard.

  You would not like the Lord to leave you alone would you?  Would you care to be like an old horse put out to graze, no longer of use here?  Are you seeking an easy pathway?  Christianity is not an easy pathway but it is a pathway full of joy, often marked by sorrow and trial, but marked by learning what God is.

  The blind man was removed from the influences of the town, and mark - he never goes back to the town.  That is a very important point in this passage.  In the town is the leaven of the Herodians: in the town you are an Englishman, in the town you are a politician.  Christianity never gives you a place in the town.  Christianity opens out a new town, a new city, the new Jerusalem.

  The next thing is that Jesus spat on his eyes (v 23) and virtue went out of Him so that the eyes of the blind man were opened.  As I said before, this man represents the disciples as they companied the Lord here, before the Spirit was given.  What was the result of His action?  The blind man saw “men as trees
, walking”.  His vision was distorted.  I do not think we perhaps realise the difficulties in the minds of the disciples.  They were poor feeble things drawn to Jesus by affection and though in close proximity to Him were fondly nursing the idea that the leaders of their nation would receive the blessed Master.  Their hearts were beating high with this hope - it comes out in their thoughts and their actions in many passages.  Before redemption was accomplished and the Spirit given it must be so.  They were, so to speak, in the infantile stage, it could not be otherwise.

  You see the mother yonder in her cottage.  She is ironing, and in the cradle lies her baby, and as she irons she talks to it.  
‘Your father is coming home’ she says and so she goes on ironing and talking.  Does the child understand?  No, not a bit, and yet she talks to it.  Exactly, she finds her pleasure in talking to her child of her interests.

  The Lord said much which the disciples did not understand, but afterwards they understood.  The Spirit would bring all things to your remembrance.  At present they had an exaggerated idea of men, they gave undue prominence to them in their thoughts.  Their religious leaders were to them “as trees walking”.  We want to get clear of the scribes and Pharisees - clear of the three leavens in fact, to see all things clearly.

  I trust you are following, I am gradually working up to my point that the apprehension of our glory leads to discipleship.  This is the road to it.  Lower down in the chapter the Lord tells them He is going to suffer.  He was their Master - they loved Him and when He begins to teach them that “the Son must suffer many things and be rejected of the elders and of the chief priests and scribes and be killed, and after three days rise again”, Peter cannot bear it.  Peter “saw men
, as trees walking” - the elders, the priests and the scribes - those who sat in Moses’ seat had an important place in his mind.  Peter rebukes the Lord!  He really loved his Master, he could not bear to think of Him suffering.  Don’t go that way, Lord!  Peter had been trained to look up to these people and in effect he says, 
‘I cannot bear you to suffer at the hands of these men’.  
“But when hhe had turned looked on his disciples, he rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me, Satan: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men”.  Jesus really says to Peter, 
‘Satan is handling your flesh’.  Striking words, “Get thee behind me
, Satan”.
  The Scripture said, Christ must suffer; the Lord Himself said so and yet Peter stands up before the Lord and rebukes Him.  The Lord replies, “Thou savourest not the things that be of God but the things that be of men”.
  
I trust that you will pay attention to this, beloved brethren, Satan is always watching uncovered flesh, especially in the Lord’s servants, in order to dishonour the Lord and to distress His people.  The cross of Christ alone keeps flesh in the silence of death.  Satan works to dishonour Christ and to injure His beloved people.  It is necessary therefore for us to walk in constant self-judgment.  We must be practical.  It is not what we say at the desk but what we 
are that matters.  It is a serious question - 
Christianity is intensely serious and real and it behoves us to be real also.  It is not what a man says but the way in which he says it and the way in which his life is affected by it that tells.  A person may speak of the removal of man - these three kinds of man, the religious, the mental and the political - at the cross, but what do we know of it in our practical experience?  We shall be free of them in proportion to our appreciation of the way in which they have been dealt with at the cross.

  In verse 25 we get the second touch of Jesus on this man.  “After that He put His hands again upon His eyes and made him look up and he was restored and saw every man clearly”.
  
The second touch lies in the gift of the Spirit.  He commanded him to look up.  How far did he look up?  Into the glory of God.  The Man in the glory of God should be your glory.  So later, it came about that Peter, after receiving the Spirit, was a very different Peter from that one in this passage - a different man entirely.  Under the second touch he was delivered from the religious man here.  A time comes when you are brought not only to the precious Saviour, as you all do, but you look up and are occupied with a Man in the glory.  Then God’s purpose for you becomes your purpose for yourself.  How many of you have looked up into the glory?  How many of you are conscious of a link with Him there?  He is your precious Saviour - one could not make too much of that - but have you reached that point in your history when Christ becomes your true glory.  It is then that we see things distinctly.  We talk about conversion, that is a conversion indeed!  It would revolutionise our lives.  God’s thought for you is presented in Christ and where He is, is God’s thought for you.  I cannot bring you there; I can effect nothing.  It is by the Spirit alone that it can be done.

  I cannot, of course, follow out this passage without linking it up with the third chapter of Philippians.  That is essentially the blind man under the second touch of Christ.  But before doing so I will relate an anecdote which may help you to grasp my meaning when I say that every man has his glory.  I relate this especially for the young people.  It is told that the Earl of Roseberry, and I believe it to be quite true, that when a boy at school he once said, 
‘I propose three things for myself:  I will be Prime Minister, I will marry the richest woman in England and I will win the Derby
’.  
He did all three.  It is an illustration of my point.  These three things constituted his glory.  What you propose for yourself becomes your glory.  I am speaking now of natural things.

  What you propose for yourself you seek after and your whole life is coloured by it.
  A certain man I knew spoke to me once thus, ‘If I could earn £500 a year I would just settle down comfortably’.  
He reached that figure but then he said, ‘I would like to reach £1000 a year’.  
He shifted his glory from £500 to £1000 a year.  That is what he was pursuing.

  The true glory of a Christian is Christ, Christ where He is.  As He is known in your soul by the power of the Spirit, you see Him and know Him where He is, and you will have reached the point that HE is your true glory.  Man does not reach true happiness by attaining his object here, but when your eyes are opened to see Christ where He is there is true satisfaction.  There is no mistake about it, you have come under His gracious influence to become like Him.  
‘Grace will end in Glory’. 
  I will now return to what I proposed saying as to the third chapter to the Philippians.  This is the language of Paul.  In the twelfth to fourteenth verses he says, “Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect
: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which I also am apprehended of Christ Jesus.  Brethren, I count 
not myself to have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press towards the mark of the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus”. 
  What a blessed thing!  These are the words of the man who hated Christ with deepest hatred, in whose heart was concentrated Jewish and Pharisaical pride.  He hated the name of Christ, he pursued the saints even to their deaths.  He raised his voice against them and hailed them to prison.  He it was who sat and witnessed the death of the martyr Stephen - and yet a blameless man in his outward walk.  In his religious days none could bring a charge against him - the most blameless man the world ever saw.

  He is only a pattern of hundreds of others in this day of great religiousness - outward zeal, yet burning with hatred to Christ.  The Lord looked down on Saul as he set out on his mission of destruction and said, 
‘I will capture him’.  
“Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?”  A light from heaven shone upon him and he fell upon his face.  The blessed Lord took charge of that man.  He placed love in that heart where there had been hatred.  
‘You shall go my way now, Saul’.  
There never was a man who loved Christ so much; never was there a man who, after conversion, loved the saints so much.  “And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you
; though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved”.  (2 Cor 12: 15)

  The early verses of the third chapter of Philippians tell what he was. (vv 4-7). “If any other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more” etc. etc.  He was jealous, orthodox, blameless.  Imagine in front of you a blackboard and with a piece of chalk let to write out all that he was.  In the centre of the blackboard is a small spot in which one can read the words, 
‘Gain to me, I get the credit of all that’.  That spoils the whole thing.

  Now what follows, “but what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ.  Yea doubtless
, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, etc”.  (vv 7 & 8)  All
 that life could be written out on another blackboard and what is in the centre of it this time?  
‘Christ the living spring of it all and getting the credit of all that He did’.  
Now this man speaks, his eye and heart fixed on that blessed Christ.  He is drawing nearer and nearer to the glory and his apprehension of it is increasing as he approaches.  The first time he speaks of his conversion it is “a light from heaven” that shone round about him.  In his second record he says, “a great light”.  In the third account, when he stands before Agrippa it is “a light above the brightness of the sun”.  His appreciation gets stronger.  Now he says ardently, 
‘I am going after that’.  There is power in Christ to draw that man’s foot along a path of suffering, shame and loss.  It was the gain of Christ that drew him along that path.  Well now, the apostle is pursuing his course, “Not as though I had already attained” etc.  “Let us therefore
, as many as be perfect, be thus minded”.  
(vv 12 & 15)  Note the word “perfect” in each of those verses.  What is the difference between the “perfect” of v 12 and that of v 15?

  We are told of a celebrated artist in Italy who had several young students.  These young men had been under his tuition some long while and one day he said to them, 
‘I want you each to paint me a picture’.  
He had a high gallery and he allowed them take their choice from the same.  The young men loved their master, they were willing to please him, so they spread their canvasses here or there according to their choice and all settled down to work - all except one.  He roamed the gallery till at the 
bottom he found a masterpiece, a perfect picture, and there he stopped drinking in all its beauties as only an artist can.  
‘If I must copy’ said he, ‘It must be this’ and he commenced his work.  At last the master, going round reached him and enquired, 
‘How are you getting on?’  
‘Oh!’ he exclaimed, ‘don’t look at my daub, look at that’, pointing to the original and he commenced to dilate on the copy before him.  The master was pleased; he recognised in this student one with an eye for what was perfect.

  In the presence of present circumstances, leaving out the natural side of it, ask yourself, why is all this permitted.  He has permitted it to show us how little we know of our heavenly calling.  We have to own it, and yet, we need not be downhearted, yet if we would but let the truth work, our lives would be revolutionised.  If you “see all things clearly” you will say, “All things work together for good”, you will begin to acknowledge all His ways with you are according to His purpose for you here.

  Many a time I have stood upon the beach and watched pieces of driftwood washed up by the waves and washed back again, and I have said to myself, ‘William, that is like you’.  
Again, often in the Downs I have watched the ships riding majestically over the waters.  Ah!  When you see Christ and have known Christ, 
then you will ride majestically.  No longer driftwood, Oh no! no longer a creature of circumstances, degraded as a Christian.  What are you here for?  I ask you, since the Saviour drew near to you in your night of misery, what have you learnt of Him?  What headway have you made?  He had in His mind for you that you should be like Him and with Him for ever.  It is a very great thing to live in the light of your glory.  And how encouraging it is to know that He is helping you on in that line.  If you walk up to the light you have got, more will be revealed to you.

  Listen to the apostle, as he writes by the Spirit the tears drop on the paper as he sorrows over the “earthly minded”.  There is the contrast, “as many as be perfect” and those who are 
“otherwise minded”.  He recalls them to their calling.  “ou
r citizenship is in heaven” (v 20) “from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ” etc.
  The blind man was to go back to his house - he was never told to go to the town.  You go back to your house to bear the heavenly character and you will be a better man, a better child, a better wife, a better husband, a better servant - whatsoever relationship you are set in will be filled in a 
better way.  But you are not told to go to the town - there is no direction given by which you may be a magistrate or other official, and why?  Because your citizenship is in heaven.

  I ask the Lord to help you.  He alone can effect anything.  Look to Him.  If you want to be miserable look in; if you want to be distracted look around; if you want to be perfectly happy look up.  Sweet is the thought that I belong to another world where Christ is.  God has touched me from the place where He is to show me that my place is where Jesus is, and the support will come from that place.  We have a spot, let us look up, may it be so.

  The knowledge of our glory leads to discipleship and the knowledge of a glorified Christ will enable you to pursue your way down here in this world.  I had to come here because I had to go there.  What sets me in movement is Christ in glory.

  May these feeble words be used of Him to rouse each one of us to follow in that path, for His name’s sake.  Amen. 

_____________________
  
“MASCHIL” OR “GIVING INSTRUCTION”
Psalm 32, and 142
  These two psalms bring before us the end of all God's ways with us, the object of all His instruction; that is, that we might come to know Him, that we might come to the knowledge of God.  He takes us up and instructs us, in order that we might find our joy in all that God is.  That is the end of all His ways with us, it is the object of His instruction.  If we think of the scripture in 
1 Corinthians 15, where we come to the final solution of all His ways, we see, “Then shall the Son himself be subject ... that God may be all in all”.  So that we see that whether we think of His ways with us now, or His ways publicly and finally in the future, both are to the one end, that we might know God, that He might be all in all to us.

  Now one word as to these psalms, these Maschil psalms; these are the first and the last, but there are thirteen such psalms; they are all entitled Maschil, that is, “’to give instruction’, - and the instruction is in the knowledge of God.  They cover the instruction that the “wise” - the Maschilim - in Daniel 11 have been brought into; they cover the wisdom in which they will instruct the people of God in that coming terrible day of Jacob's trouble, the “great tribulation”.
  
But these psalms give us the detail of their wisdom and the way God brought them into it.  God never leaves Himself without such as can instruct His people in any given circumstances; He will instruct them and teach them in His ways with them, so that they may be capable of helping and instructing others in like circumstances.  So with the Maschilim: they will have so come under God's instruction for themselves that He will be able to use them for the help and instruction and comfort of His people in the day of great tribulation.  God will see to it that there are those ready and capable of instructing His people then, of ministering to them the knowledge of God.

  These psalms give us what God will instruct His people in then.  I suggest that they cover the whole of the instruction of the Maschilim, that they shew their preparation by God that they may turn the many to righteousness and instruct the many in that coming day.  If things go to the bad in man's hand, God takes occasion by that very fact to shew His care and His provision for His people.  It is a blessed reality to our souls to find through the very difficulty of our circumstances what God can be for and to us.  God has given us great light, beloved brethren, and He 
would bring us into the blessed reality of what the light tells us of.  The light, I need hardly say, is all centred in Christ, and what makes it good to us is the work of the Spirit in us; He brings us into the good of Christ.

  Now the first Maschil psalm is 32; it begins at the end, as in fact all psalms do; and the end is that God should be known as the rejoicing of His people.  He would have His people to rejoice in Him.  The last Maschil psalm is 142, where we find that David is shut up in the cave, but he is shut up to God there.  Nobody knew him; nobody cared for him; refuge had failed him, but he was 
shut up to God.  The end of that is that God deals bountifully with him; be rejoices in God, and the righteous with him.

  Psalm 32 is the first of the Maschil psalms, and it shews us how God becomes known to His people.  It is not Christianity; perhaps it is not God known according to the height of the revelation of Himself, but it does shew this, that God is to be known in the souls of His people, and to this end He puts away our sins.  So David describeth the blessedness of the man “whose transgression is forgiven
, whose sin is covered”.  It is what God 
does, He forgives sins and covers transgressions.  But if He puts away our sins, it is that He may put Himself in the place of that which He puts away.  That is the object of the forgiveness: that God may be known in the soul of the forgiven one.  So that I can say, My sins are forgiven!  But what have I got besides?  I have got the knowledge of God, I have got the knowledge of Christ who put away my sins.  So in this first Maschil psalm we come to this element of the knowledge of God: God is known as Justifier; He forgives the iniquity of our sins.  Then further, He is our hiding place, “Thou art a hiding place for me”.  And He is our Guide; He instructs and teaches us in the way we should go, and the result is that we confide in Jehovah, we rejoice in all that He is.  We know the supreme happiness of having God before us, and not ourselves or our sins.

  So the first teaching brings us to this that God stands out livingly before the soul; He is all to us.  If He justifies us from His side He will have a subjective answer in us, and that is He brings us to the point of “no guile”.  What always accompanies the grace of God in forgiveness is that we are without guile; we hide nothing from Him; we confess our transgressions to Him; we do not hide from Him, for He has won our confidence.  Then secondly, we hide in Him in all that He is, and we are guided by Him.
  
There is the consciousness on our part that the eye of God is resting upon us, and we are guided in the way in which we should go because He counsels us with His eye upon us.  Then the end of it is that we rejoice in God; we boast in God; He is our joy for ever.  That is the end of all His instruction whether for us or for Israel.
  
When Israel has come to know God they, too, will find their joy according to their measure in all that God is for them.
  Other Maschil psalms are 42, 44. and 45, they shew us the way to Christ; it is the way of deliverance.  Deliverance is reached when Christ is reached, when the Man is reached who has brought them out of all their distresses.  So Psalm 45 brings you to the King - the Beloved, and the excellences of the Man who is the King are detailed for us; they are reached in the soul, and we know deliverance from all our distresses, for we have reached Christ.

  Then having learnt to appreciate the true Man, God's Man, we can bear to have the character of Antichrist unfolded to us; we shall know how to refuse Antichrist.  So Psalms 5255 are all about Antichrist; they shew us the true character of Antichrist, who loves evil rather than good and lying rather than righteousness.  Then Psalm 74 is instruction to call upon God when he has filled the earth with violence, when the tumult of those that rise up against God ascends continually, and then Psalm 78 shews us God's sovereign goodness in all His ways with His people, feeding them according to the integrity of His heart and guiding them by the skilfulness of His hands.

  Then we come on to Psalm 88, a psalm in which there is no comfort.  J.N.D. said he was comforted in reading this psalm because it brought him to a spot where there was no comfort, “lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and 
my familiar friends into darkness”.  It is a very terrible experience to be brought anywhere near that, but blessed in its results.  I need hardly say that this psalm speaks of the sufferings of the blessed Lord in being made a curse for us.

  Well, the end of all instruction is that we may know God; that is what David is brought to in Psalm 142, he had to be shut up in a cave that he might learn God.  And we, too, have to come to that, that no man cares for us, for then it is that God says to us, 
I know you, I am for you.
  Beloved brethren, it is worth while going through all these experiences that we may come to know God.  Think of learning
 God in such a way, as the One who is for us!  Let us grow by 
the true knowledge of God.  Psalm 43 says, “Send out thy light and thy truth: 
they shall lead me; they shall bring me to thy holy mount”.  The light and the truth meet us in the darkness and the distance, so that they may lead us and bring us to be at home in the place from which they came.

  God wants to be our “exceeding joy” - think of it!  
Is He that to you?  
Well, our true blessing lies in the knowledge of God Himself.  

________________________
  From ‘Mutual Comfort’, 1916
  
RECOVERED FOR GOD'S PLEASURE
2 Kings 4: 1-7; 5: 9-14; 6: 1-7 and 13-17; 2 Timothy 1: 8-12
  It is of great importance to see that the days in which we live have been foretold by the Spirit of God so that we may not be taken by surprise.
  There is no epistle more encouraging than the Second Epistle to Timothy, which foretells the condition of things in the presence of which we now are.  On the one side there is the faithful portrayal of these days, while on the other there is the great encouragement for us in them, because that which cannot fail is presented to us - that is, the testimony of the Lord.  No matter what happens, or what departure there may be, the testimony remains, and it has been God's way all through, in the darkest day to have the brightest testimony.  That is distinctly encouraging.  I am encouraged by it myself, and I should not be here but for what is set before us in this epistle.  I want to be in that testimony - that is what we should seek above all things - and to respond to it practically.

  The testimony of the Lord is Christ, or what God has in Christ - that blessed One; nothing can fail that is established in Him.
  I want to shew you, in the simplest possible way, from the narrative that I have read from the Book of Kings, how the testimony of the Lord spoken of in Timothy is illustrated.
  There is a striking analogy between the times of the Old Testament of which I have read, and the times in which we live.  It was the darkest moment in the history of God’s earthly people, but God did not fail His people.  God’s testimony was with Elisha.

  There are four things, in the order in which I have read the narratives, to present to you illustrating what 1 think is set before us in Timothy.
  In this remarkable passage in Timothy we get the origin, manifestation and final triumph of the testimony.  There is first the origin of it, then the manifestation of it by the appearing of Jesus Christ, and finally the triumph of it in that day.  There is
 -
Grace, Cleansing, Recovery, Power
in the testimony, and the four incidents that I have read from Kings set forth those four points.
  It is a very great thing to taste that the Lord is gracious.  I suppose there is not a word more frequently used than “grace”, but it is one thing to speak of it and another to know the taste of it in our souls.  It is not simply that I can explain it, but my soul has tasted it - I like that word “taste”.
  
Have you tasted that the Lord is gracious? 
  Grace is set forth in the testimony of the Lord, and that grace is in Christ, because Christ is God's testimony.
  The first narrative that I read to you is an exceedingly simple one.  The woman was in the presence of responsibility - she had no way of meeting her liability and was in very great distress, in that her two sons were to be sold, but she cried to Elisha because the testimony of the Lord was with him.  Let us look for a moment at this little picture; we all need to be established in grace, for we are greatly lacking in it.  Our constant tendency is to be legal, and that is because we are not established in the grace that comes in the testimony of our Lord.

  The prophet asks the woman what she has got.  All she had was a pot of oil.  Elisha tells her that she is to shut herself in with this pot of oil.  She was to be shut in with God and her deep need and that little pot of oil.

  The door was to be shut.  People are more or less in the presence of man, but man must be excluded.  If we were more with God we should have a deepened sense of the blessing.  It is because man is so much in presence that we are so weak.

  That little pot of oil is the Spirit of grace that is in Christ.  You remember how the Lord speaks, “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because be hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor”, etc. - there we get the anointed Vessel of the marvellous grace that came into this world.

  Now I ask you - have you been shut in with God and a risen Christ?  I would ask you with great anxiety - do you know what it is to be shut in with God, man shut out, and to be there in the presence of God to learn God's disposition towards you in that blessed Person who lives before His face and who was down here on earth in the power of the Spirit?  That is the way to learn that God is gracious.  He is God’s unfailing resource - the risen Christ in the presence of God, “who was delivered for our offences, and 
was raised again for our justification”, etc.  “By whom we have 
access … into this grace wherein we stand”.  There was sufficiency to meet all our need, and in the Spirit it all becomes available to us.

  Grace never fails.  Do you think that there is a moment when we might think that it does?  I may know doctrinally that grace never fails, but there is such a thing as putting your soul through the drilling and to keep the sense in your soul of God's disposition towards you, to measure what God will be to you by what He finds in Christ, not to measure what God will be to you by what you find in yourself: He whose going has been established and whose feet have been set upon the rock.

  Well, the woman's debt was paid, and she lived on the remainder.  May the Lord establish that word in our souls. 

* * * *
  Now with Naaman it is not a question of responsibility but condition.  The very next lesson I have to learn after tasting the grace of God is, what sin in the flesh is - that is, what I am.  The story is often preached from, but I have always had a difficulty because I could see it was not a question of guilt but of condition - Naaman was a leper.  A little maid knew where God's testimony was, but the King of Israel did not know. It is little people who may know where God's testimony is when big people miss it.  If you want to be in God's testimony you have to be little.  I do not look for the great people of this world to be in connection with the testimony, but obscure people often know where the Lord's testimony is.

  Well, Naaman is greatly disappointed when the servant of Elisha comes out with the message “Go wash”, etc.  He says, “I thought, He will surely come out to me ... and strike his hand over the place”.  What I understand by “the place” is, that he had not learnt that he was 
altogether unclean.  It is not “the place” - our pride, or our temper, or whatever it may be, it is 
ourselves.
  Naaman had to learn that he was leprous all over.  Not the place but the whole man.  “But”, he says, “Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel?”  He had to wash in Jordan.  Jordan means descent.  You must go down to the river Jordan.  Why there?  The ark has been through that river.  Think of it - death has been annulled because He (Christ) has been down into it; He has made that river efficacious and turned it into a means of cleansing.  That is the spiritual meaning.

  Naaman had to dip seven times - seven times we are taught to appreciate the death of Christ in real soul history.  Your measure of the appreciation of the death of Christ is the measure in which you have been made to feel your need of it.  It is the triumph of God - He has annulled death, and death is the cleanser.  That is the way you are taught to love Christ - every time you dip you are taught to love the One who made it efficacious at such a cost to Himself.  Oh, blessed death!
  
If you have tasted it yourself you will understand me, but not if you are a mere doctrinal person.  Love has made death efficacious.  That is the cleansing.  He has made death the cleanser, and I am taught to appreciate it seven times - a life-long lesson. 

* * * *
  I come next to the axe-head, which is recovered.  Christ has brought life to light, it is recovered for God's pleasure.  The axe-head went down to the bottom - it was lost, but God brings the axe-head to the surface.  I am convinced that this illustrates the beauty of the testimony of our Lord; that is, that life and incorruptibility are brought to light.

  The thought that I have been recovered for God gives me the greatest possible pleasure -  that He should think it worth while to recover me for His pleasure.  It gives me peculiar pleasure - I was the axe-head and it went down, and no human power could bring it up.  The axe-head - I, a poor lost soul, utterly sunk in the depth of ruin, have been recovered for God's pleasure.

  That is the great idea in Luke’s gospel, that we are recovered for God's pleasure in the life of another Man - Jesus Christ.
  Life involves the revelation of what God is, and a response to that revelation; that is to say, He annulled death because He brought to light the love of God in the very spot where sin and man were removed.
  Then on the other hand He gives us the capacity to answer to it in His own life, in the power of the Spirit.
  It is very simple.  There was a tree growing by Jordan - there was life there.  Let us look at it - “I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart” -  that marked the tree growing by Jordan - a thing of beauty.

  I refer now to Psalm 14 - “The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God”, but He found none, there was not one man answering to Him; no, not one.  What desolation!  What awful degradation!  In the next psalm we get, “Who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill?”  In Psalm 16 the voice is heard, “Preserve me, O God
: for in thee do I put my trust”.  God found a Man to answer to Himself perfectly.  Do you find peculiar pleasure in the thought that one Man here had God for His head?  

  Psalm 16 is most blessed.  One Man having God for His head - answering to God absolutely, and our recovery for God is in that Man.  That one Man has pledged that He will recover us for God's pleasure.  “I delight to do thy will, O my God”.  

  The tree was cut down and had to go into death in order to make it possible - He has annulled death and brought to light life and incorruptibility.  How does He do this?
  
He gives us the ability to respond to it.  He stooped into death to write the law of love on the fleshy tables of my heart.  The writer is the perfect revelation of God.  He has brought the axe-head up - I am recovered for the pleasure of God, in His life.

  Now He has brought life to light and gives the ability in the power of His own life to respond to God.  God sees the best part of man - what is the best part of me? 

  My heart - He sees if my heart is responsive to Him and that gives Him pleasure.  He has so revealed Himself to us that He gives us the ability to answer to Him in holy affection.  The first action of the life of Christ in a Christian is that he responds to God.  The result is, “In thee do I put my trust”.  It is love that gives us confidence, and it is the heart that confides in God.

  Do you know the luxury it is to trust God, to be shut up to Him when no creature can help you?  Man disappears and God supports you.  Life for the Christian is the love of God; to live is to love, and to love is to live.

  Then if I am recovered I need power.  Satan is not so much against people going to heaven when they die, as he is set against anything that is for the pleasure of God down here.  If you have a sense in your soul that you are recovered for God's pleasure, and you respond to that holy love, 
you have got pressure - all the pressure is against such an one.  It means a great deal.

  There was a host of people surrounding the village of Dothan, and the young man says, “Alas, my master! how shall we do?”  There were only two to stand against the host.  The testimony of the Lord was with Elisha, and he prayed, “Open his eyes, that he may see”.  It is a great thing to have your eyes opened.  When his eyes were opened he saw that all the power of God was with Elisha - with the testimony of our Lord.

  The power of God is with that testimony because it is His testimony and according to God.  

  The Spirit is here, but He gives you the ability to look to the Lord in whom the power is, and whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.  Do you believe, dear reader, that there is an irresistible power down here, far greater than any physical power could be?  Do you believe the Holy Ghost is here?  Do you know anything stronger than such a power as this?  That power is available for us.

  One may be inclined oftentimes to give up, for Satan is opposed to anything for God's pleasure down here; he does not mind our adopting religious notions, but if it is anything for God's pleasure he will oppose it.
  But the Spirit of God is here, so let us be encouraged - where the testimony of the Lord is there is very sweet music.  I want to be with the singers - with those who sing 
with the Lord.
  Every Christian sings to the Lord - he would not be a Christian if he did not.  So many Christians are in Babylonish captivity where they cannot sing.  The moment you get away from the testimony you get into Babylonish captivity.

  May the Lord bless His word and establish us in grace so that we are recovered for the pleasure of God.  

__________________________
  From ‘The Believer’s Friend’, 1917

THE LAW OF THE HOUSE OF GOD
Psalms  22: 1-3; 26; 1 Corinthians 10: 14-22; 11: 17-27

  Someone has said: ‘If we confine our attention to the Old Testament we are legal; if we study only the New Testament we are theoretical; but if we study both Old and New we shall be practical’ - so I read from both.
  Last week the subject before us was the way to the house of God, and we were looking at the Songs of Degrees as setting it forth, and to-night my subject is the law of the house.  If you do not recognise the law of the house you will not appreciate the privileges of the house.  I believe that this is the need of the moment.  You cannot turn from this subject, for before you can enjoy privileges you 
must face the responsibility: but I want to speak of this in a way that will make you feel, and respond to, His love.
  You may ask where we get the expression, “the law of the house”?  I refer you to Ezekiel 43: 10-12, where it occurs.  Of course I only apply to ourselves a passage which refers to a future day.  “It is most holy” - this is the law of the house.  And I may say that in the last verse of the Book of Ezekiel you will find the privilege of the house, “The Lord is there”  That is what will make it so beautiful in a coming day.  If the 
Lord is there you may depend upon it there will be blessing.  “Here will I dwell, for I have desired it”  That is the privilege of the house.

  The reason why I have read Psalm 22 is to shew that in death the Lord secured the privilege of the house.  In this psalm the Lord appears in the bitter night of weeping.  The title of the psalm, “Aijeleth Shahar”, means 
‘the dawning of the day’, and it is the dawning of the everlasting day.  You get first the bitter night of weeping, and then the joy of the morning.  God puts things in the right order.  It is not morning and evening, but “the evening and the morning were the first day”.  If there is a bitter night of weeping, you may be sure that God will secure a morning of joy.  It always follows the night.  If you have to go through a night of sorrow, look out for the joy: it will be sure to come, and mark you, 
that joy lies outside the reach of death; if you touch it, you reach what is beyond the shadow of death.
  What do you possess outside the reach of death?  I ask myself that question, and it always does me good.  I am sensible of God's goodness to 
me in earthly things, and I thank Him for His mercies, but death's shadow is there.  The joy of which I speak is the deathless joy of the house of God.  Christ went into death, into those afflictions and sufferings, to secure a dwelling-place for God, a habitation for God where the joy of that morning should be known.  

  The Lord said, “Be not thou far from me”.  If all others forsake me, do not Thou forsake me, but He has to say, “Why hast thou forsaken me?”  No one can fathom those depths. 
 But when He was in that dark and distant spot, His own blessed heart answered back, He gives the reason why He was there.  The first reason He gives is, “Thou art holy,” and then God dwells in the praises of His people.  In that dark spot He could look into eternity, and see that every bit of praise that God would get must be secured by Him there.

  How fitting that He should lead the praises!  And there never will be a bit of praise in which God will take pleasure that Christ does not lead.  He is the great choirmaster.  “Thou art holy,” that is the law of the house.  It will not admit of anything that is not holy.  In the end of the psalm there is a glorious stream of praise that He leads.  Wherever you read such passages you will find He was there to secure a people for God.  “A seed shall serve him,” that is, 
‘worship him’.  

  I turn now to Corinthians.  I said that the Lord secured the law of the house in death, and that love will recognise it.  The Epistle to the Corinthians is written in a spirit of jealousy.  The Lord has a right to be jealous.  There never was such love as His, and He has a right to be jealous.

  I call your attention to the last chapter.  In the midst of warm Christian greetings the apostle stops, a feeling of jealousy comes over him.  He pulls himself up, and says, “If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha”  He was an apostle and could say that.  I could not, of course, say it, but in these days it is well to read these words, and one is made to feel the propriety of them.

  The love of Christ burned in his heart. That is what we want - love to Christ.  Paul's eye was resting on the glory, and his heart filled with love to Christ, and he could say, “God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ”.  

  And here he says, “Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy?” (Chap 10:  22)  He wants my heart to be so affected by the love of Christ that I may be jealous over myself.  If we are not jealous over ourselves, it provokes the Lord to jealousy.  Are we stronger than He? 

  The apostle had to write to the Corinthians in this corrective way.  There was great carelessness as to their associations, and we also are weak on this point.  Chapter 10 is separation, chapter 11 is seclusion.  If there is not separation from things without, there will not be seclusion within.  The apostle brings before them the nature of Christian fellowship; he is not giving the 
order of the Lord's supper, you will notice he mentions the cup first.  Death is the introduction to it.  Fellowship is set forth in the cup.  He says to them, You are committing an outrage upon the death 
of Christ.  They were going off to heathen temples, and he says, You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons.

  I am a baptised Christian, but I say to the Lord, Give me to know what my baptism means; and to be true to my baptism I have no right to a will - I am to live to God.  You 
“were baptised unto his death”, you have no right to a will.  As our hearts are under the power of His love, where the affections are in play, there it is that we are true to our baptism - we live to God.

  I have no right to a place here; martyrdom is the idea. To the early Christians it meant martyrdom.  Of the people of God it is said, “We are killed all the day long”.  Things are altered, I know, but this is what it means, “accounted as sheep for the slaughter”.  What put them there?  Their baptism.  But those people could not be separated from the love of God, nothing can separate us from the love of God.

  That is the answer to the question, What do I possess beyond the reach of death?  The LOVE OF GOD.  If I died to-night it would not take me out of my joy.  It could be said to a Corinthian saint, who went to a heathen
 temple?  
You are committing an outrage against the death of Christ, for if a man identified himself with Jewish or heathen temples, he did not keep the law of the house.  “Let him that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity” - that is insisting on the law of the house.  There is nothing but confusion if we look around, but in scripture it is plain: “The Lord knoweth them that are his; and let everyone that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity”.  They are to purge themselves from the vessels to dishonour, to be sanctified for the Lord.

  There is much to be thankful for, because the Lord is so good, but there is much to be deplored.  There is not the separation there should be.  We are paralysed by our associations, so that when we come together we are spiritually feeble.  May God give to us a large heart and a true conscience!  

  In Psalm 26, verse 8 is the key to the psalm: “I have loved the habitation of thy house”  You must put it side by side with Psalm 22: 3.  And you will remember how in Psalm 132 he says, “I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob”.  

  “They shall prosper that love thee”, spoken of Jerusalem, is true to-day, for if the assembly is loved there will be spiritual prosperity.  Let us wake up to these things.  The man whose soul is growing prosperously is the man who loves Zion.  Do you feel a spring in your soul when you turn your back on your place and come to His place?  The Psalmist says, “I have loved thy house”.  It is for all the time, although especially when God's people are found together.

  In verse 3 his conduct is in accordance with that: “Thy loving-kindness is before mine eyes; and I have walked in thy truth”.  
Moved by this loving-kindness there is the desire to be consistent with the place he loves.
  Then verses 4 and 5, “I have not sat with vain persons ... I have hated the congregation of evil-doers”  Those two verses sum up 1 Corinthians 10.  I will be true to the law of the house; true to His death, and touch nothing that is contrary to it.  It is what is due to the love of the Lord that secured the law of the house.  He washes his hands, he keeps himself pure, feet and hands preserved from evil.  

  Now suffer the word of exhortation.  
We must be careful about these things - have our hands clean, and our feet clean.  There must be personal separation and purity in our dealings with others.  “So will I compass thine altar, O Lord”.  It is easy to open the hymn book and give out fine hymns, but if the hands are not clean it is an abomination in the sight of the Lord.  What are you doing that disturbs your conscience?  You must not play tricks with your conscience; God grant us to take this word seriously to heart!

  Think, for instance, of a man who is in debt taking part in the assembly!  It is a frightful thing for a Christian to be in debt.  We must pay our debts.  I appeal to you that we may be true to His death.  “My foot standeth in an even place”.
  
Then he is free to praise.  “In the congregations will I bless the Lord”.  I pray God to make a mark on my soul as much as upon yours as to this.  If you love the house you love the law of the house.  Do not provoke the Lord to jealousy, but may we be provoked to jealousy of ourselves, that we may be true to the law of the house out of love to Him who secured it.

  1 Corinthians 11: 17 to chapter 14 is one complete section.  These people came together to have a feast; such a state of things could not be now, not in that outrageous way.  They spread a meal for themselves, while others hungered, and some of them even got drunk!  A very shocking state of things, but the point of the passage is that there were divisions among them.

  Where the Lord is apprehended in the supper, there will be accord.  The great choir-master puts the choir in order.  It is the love that puts us in accord.  You do not take the Lord’s supper as an individual you take it with others.  At the supper it is the Lord’s love to the company: we eat
 together, drink together - it brings us together.  Think of two brothers severed in thought and feeling from each other: how can they eat the Lord's supper?  Nay, they do not eat it.  If you eat the supper you are made one.  We are the objects of one love.  The Corinthians had missed it.

  The One who secured the place, the choirmaster (I say it with reverence), puts the choir in order, and if it is not in order there is no singing; better pray then.  Nothing gives Him greater pleasure than to have us in company with Himself.  Let us see to it that we are.

  Chapter 10 is SEPARATION from things without; chapter 11 is that we are to be in the ACCORD OF LOVE.  Love must be supreme.  I pray God we may not be legal.

  Do not let us be formal, but let us understand what the spirit of the supper is - the LORD’S LOVE.  He leads the praises in the assembly.  Let us get alone with the Lord, dear brethren, get under the impress of His love, and be filled with the Spirit.

__________________
  From ‘The Believer’s Friend’, 1917
  
THE PRIESTHOOD OF CHRIST
Hebrews 3: 1; 5: 5-9; 7: 24 – 8: 2
  I want to speak of the priesthood of Christ.  
I do not think we know His priestly service on our side sufficiently.  
We know much that is true, know it as light, but I hope we want to know how the truth works out in a practical way.
  The reason why we are not more at home with the Lord in the assembly is that we do not know Him enough with us through the week.
  There are five points before me :
  (1) The righteous basis of priesthood.
  (2) The people for whom the priesthood is exercised, and 
    
how are they designated.
  (3) Who the Priest is, and where He is.
(These two points depend on each other.)
  (4) The way He has qualified Himself to be our Priest.
  (5) The way He exercises His priesthood.
  (First)  
The Lord Jesus could not be a Priest here; it was after the sacrificial work was over that He entered on the priesthood. Perhaps some are not established in the benefit of the sacrifice.  
To such let me say this: the God to whom you are responsible, and who alone could rightly measure the character of your responsibility, has come in to settle it according to His own estimate of it and to His own satisfaction.
  It is remarkable that we get three questions answered as to the Priest in the first three verses of this epistle: who He is, what He did, and where He is.  
Who is He?  A divine Person, He alone could give divine satisfaction, and He became a man to do it.

  He is where He is because He did what He did where He was.  
A man who was under conviction of sin, listening to the gospel for eight weeks, said to me after each meeting, ‘God is just, sir’.  
That was all he could say.  
I never saw such exercise of soul - he was in intolerable anguish.  
One morning I met him and he said, ‘It is all right now’.  He had got a step further, and knew not only that God is just but that -

He is the Justifier.
  He said, ‘I saw Jesus on the cross for me, and then I saw Him in the glory, and it is all clear from there to here’.  That is peace!  I hope your soul is established on that solid basis: what 
He has done.  
God has come in from His own side to meet the question of your responsibility.
  (Second)  
The Spirit puts a volume in a few words. “Holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling”.  Such people are invited to consider the High Priest of their profession, Christ Jesus.
  
In the end of this verse there are two thoughts about the Lord - He is the Apostle and Priest.
  All that God is to me He is to me in that Person, for He is God.  
The fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell in Him.  
My desolate soul finds that that blessed One has met my need for ever.  
God is all that He is to me in Him, in order that I may know Him.  
He brings me to God that I may enjoy all that God is.
  He is Apostle because He brings God to me, and He is Priest because - 
He brings me to God.
  How could any person enjoy God apart from knowing that they are made suitable to Him?  but 
He has made us suitable.
  Look at chapter 2:. 14.  
“As the children are partakers of flesh and blood” - we are the children – “he also himself likewise took part of the same” - became a man.  
Death had no claim upon Him, but He came where the children were.  
There was this terrible power, and He went into death to deliver those who were under it.  
He has been into death to destroy Satan who held the power of death, and to deliver the children.
  Next (v 17), He makes “propitiation for the sins of the people”.  On the one hand, Satan's power broken up; on the other, propitiation made to God.
  
He comes into our place.  
He comes where the children are; our hearts are drawn to Him when we see Him doing that.  
You must learn this, the journey He took from the abode of love, where the children were thought of, down to the place where the children were found.  
Oh, that we were more affected by the love of God.  
We want to walk under the spell of His love, and our conscience pure in the presence of God.
  In Psalm 40  He says, “He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay”.  He went into distance and darkness -  it was 
horrible to Him; He went there because we were there, but His feet were brought up from that pit.
  “Miry clay” corresponds to Sinai; we have no footing with God on the ground of what we are, we cannot stand before Him; our nature is sinful, but He was made sin.  We went into it, but He has come out of it.

  Psalm 40: 3 says, “He hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God”.  If His feet are on the rock, we are on the rock; if He sings, we sing.

  Now look at Hebrews 2: 11.  “He that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren”.  I think that establishes the principle of double identification - that is the platform.
  
The Spirit of God can lead our souls into the blessedness of what it means.  
The measure in which you have been made to feel the need of His death is the measure in which you appreciate His death.
  Verse 11, “not ashamed to call us brethren”; verse 12, “I will declare thy name unto my brethren”; verse 13 is sonship, association; you put your trust in Him.  
Your knowledge of verse 13 is the measure in which you understand verse 12.  
Before you can know the privilege of the assembly you must know the path.  
If we are not in the path of life as children, we shall not know the sweet and blessed privilege of verse 12.  
If you are characterised by “self” all the week, you cannot enjoy the assembly on the Lord's day.
  (Third)  
Hebrews 5: 5 says, “Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee”.  That is a quotation from Psalm 2.
  
In that psalm we are taught the impotency of man and the majesty of God.  
If you are timid and in fear of man that will help you.  Men are banded together against God and His Christ, you have to face that when you go into the world, but in Psalm 2  you see what a poor thing man is.
  
You and I have to do with GOD, and man is impotent against God.  God says, “I 
have set my king on my holy hill; 
he is my Son”.
  The rejection of Christ brings sonship to light. CHRIST HAS BEEN REJECTED FROM THIS WORLD!  
Let that fact rest on your spirit.  
God says: You hate My Son, I kiss Him.  Christ is greeted as the Son, as man; He always was the Son
3, but now as man He is greeted thus, “Thou art my Son”.  That sets forth a new and heavenly relation for us.
  
Thank God we have kissed the Son; through grace we have been made to do that.  
Now God wants us to know Him.
  You remember when the tax-gatherers came to Peter and said, “Doeth not your master pay tribute?”.  Peter said, “Yes”.  Afterwards, in the house, the Lord spoke of it, and explained that the children were free, and told Peter what to do so as not to offend them; but these are the words I want you to notice, “that take
, and give unto them for me and thee”.  

  Is not that beautiful?  I quote it to shew the identification.
  
If it is sonship for Him, it is sonship for us.  
We have been taught that we go with that Person, like Aaron and his sons.  
If you have never tasted that, I pray God that you may do so.
  Now let me draw your attention to Galatians 4: 4, 5, 6.  
I read the end of verse 4 and the beginning of verse 5 as a parenthesis.  “When the fulness of the time was come
, God sent forth his Son ... that we might receive sonship”.  We learn in Him what sonship is, and we have His Spirit in us that we may be able to cry, “Abba, Father!”  It is a great joy to be able to say that, and God finds His pleasure in it.
  
It is not prayer.  God loves to have our hearts responsive to His love.
  
It is not asking for things, but having our hearts led into His love, so that we may say, Father!  Father!!  in rapturous joy.

  To return now to Hebrews 5.  
Christ is greeted as Priest when He took His seat up there : “Thou art -
a priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedec” (v 6).  The spot that claims Him is the spot that claims us.
  
The heavenly calling comes to view when you know Him where He is.  “Partakers of the heavenly calling” is seen in Christ where He is.

  Can you say, ‘Heaven is better than earth’?  Of course it is, you say.
  
But is it?  Is it better to 
you?  The Lord has lost the earth for the moment, and heaven 
is better than earth.  
If you come on these lines, you will find you need a priest.  
A people going to heaven (not when you die, but now) need a priest.  
Heaven is not a place of refuge, it is a home.
  (Fourth)  
How He qualified Himself to be our Priest. (Chap 5: 7)  The days of
 His flesh are over, He has reached the goal, but He has been here, He has tasted this pathway.  
He was heard for “his piety”.  
What has He not tasted?  He was hungry, weary, in sorrow and joy.
  
He has qualified Himself to touch us as none other can.  
Why do we not go to Him?  He will never misunderstand you.
  
He will attach your heart to Himself as He draws near to you.  
When none else can draw near, He will.
  The “days of his flesh” are set forth in Psalm 109.  “For my love they are my adversaries: but I give myself unto prayer”, &c.
  
Here we have the plaints of Christ in -
His lonely path
of life here.  
“Do thou for me, O God ... I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me”.  When hated down here, He says, “I put my trust in thee”.  He was absolutely perfect in it.
  
This weeping, supplicating, poor Man knew what it was to have God at His right hand (v 31), and in Psalm 110, God says, You come to My right hand.  
He has qualified Himself to be the Priest for ever.  Psalm 102 is His bitter cry in view of death.
  
If you want to know your blessed Lord, turn to Himself and ponder the scriptures which speak thus of Him.  
We learn that this blessed, weeping, supplicating, pious Man is “over all, God blessed for ever”.  Wondrous, wondrous thought! 

  Just see how it endears Him to you.  “Though, he were a Son, yet 
learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and ... he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. (v 8, 9)  He will be your Saviour if you obey Him.
  
Will He support you in a way of self-will?  Nay, He will leave you, and you may go years and years and He will never draw near to you if you 
will go a way of self-will.  
He will support you in His own life: it says all them that OBEY Him.
  (Fifth.) How He exercises the Priesthood.  (Heb 8: 1, 2)  Peter leaving the boat is the God-given illustration of the passage before us. (See Matt 14)  You can easily see in Peter's case that he did what the Son of God did.
  
He walked on the water.
  “I love” is the spring of obedience.  He found the Lord to be eternal salvation because he obeyed Him.
  
His life means that you love God, and He will support you there, but not in self-will.  
You are loved into obedience; to try to be obedient is legal. 
  Is it not sad that many a one can walk in self-will?  If a man knows priesthood, he says, I cannot go a step without Him.
  
Do you know His support?  In it you learn His interest in you, and your heart gets attached to Him.

  Another way He comes to you is in the dark hour of bereavement.  
Your place is in death's shadow.  
I know what that is; but if the Lord died out of this world, what can you and I expect after that?  When death came in in John 11,
  
see what the blessed Lord could do.  
There are two ways of learning this.  
The Lord taught Martha, but He sympathised with Mary.
  Some of us know what it is to have Christ walking with us; He is able to fill up every breach.  
It is worth learning what He can be at a moment like that.  
He is the “minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man”.  How blessed it is to know His support, to be able to say, The Lord has been with me in all my path, and now I come to enjoy His support in the sanctuary.

  I believe it is the Lord's will to give us a taste of the blessedness of being with Him in His own circumstances before we go home to Him.  
Let us seek it earnestly!  

_______________________
  From ‘The Believer’s Friend’, 1917
  
OUR PLACE AND PORTION
Ephesians 1: 1-13
  It is good for us all, poorly as we understand it, to know what is in the purpose of God for us.  It was purposed for us before the world was, before sin came in.  

  We do not read that the Ephesians were sinners at all until the blood of redemption is mentioned.
  Now it can be put in a very simple way.  If you think of the two epistles, Romans and Ephesians, the truth comes in from our side in Romans.  It is God's side of the cross, but still it is in regard to our necessity.  Our responsibility and condition has been all divinely met, for God has introduced Himself as a God of grace and love.  We must be established in the truth of Romans to fully appreciate what is in Ephesians.

  In Ephesians you are on your face and God talks to you.  Romans puts you on your face and in Ephesians God speaks to you.  Romans proves the ruin, but the ruin is the dark background where God shines in His splendour.  He overcomes the evil in us by setting forth the good in Himself.  He does not overlook the evil, the cross is the proof of that; that is Romans.  You might sum up Romans in three words - Ruin, Revelation, Response.

  In our ruin -
God revealed Himself,
God made Himself known in another Man - our blessed Lord Jesus Christ.  The ruin was proved, and God was revealed in connection with it.  This is the way in which He makes our life responsive  to Himself.

  It is good to think these things out, and it came to me very forcibly to-day: ‘Give thyself to these things’.  
I think sometimes we depend too much on ministry; we should give ourselves up.  Ministry helps if we are exercised.  People sometimes say, 
‘I never saw that before’.  The thing is to go in for 
‘spiritual thinking’, because you value the things which are presented to you.  What do you think about when you wake in the morning?  “As 
he thinketh in his heart, so is he”.  That is a very serious thing!  

  The measure of your sanctification lies in the character of your thinking.  Right actions are secured if the thinkings are right.  May the Lord help us!

  Now in Ephesians it is the way the truth is presented from God's side.  Paul closes Romans with a doxology and begins Ephesians with a doxology.  He says, “Blessed”. The sense of the vastness and marvellous beauty of God's purpose fills his heart, and he bows and says “Blessed”.  What an outburst!
  Spiritual 
blessings, not temporal; heavenly, not earthly; in Christ, not Adam.  
Well, that is the way in which the apostle begins the doxology from God's side.  

  It is God's pleasure to surround Himself with beings who respond to Him.  He dwells in light unapproachable; but if He is love, and He is, He will surround Himself with objects answering to what He is, for His own pleasure.

  Grace reached us at the bottom, that is our history side; why was it?  Because -

love wanted us at the top.
  Entertain the thought that love wanted you at the top.  If you came to Christ, it was because Christ came to you.  How gladsome it was to find some one who could settle everything, and how your heart awakened!  Oh! how you ought to love Christ.  He wants you to know how He met you on your side, because God wanted you.  To put it simply, 
God wants you.
  It is the purpose side here, that He will surround Himself with beings for His own pleasure.  It could not be without Christ.

  The characteristic preposition in Romans is to, in Colossians with, in Ephesians in; in saying this I have in my mind the position we are looked at as in these epistles.  Living
 to God in Romans, associated with Christ, “buried with him”, “raised with him”, “quickened together with him” in Colossians, and in Ephesians the purpose side is “in the heavenlies in Christ”, “chosen in him”, “taken into favour in the Beloved”, &c, as also in chapters 2 and 3, which gives us the subjective side, that is, His work to effect His purpose.
  ‘At-homedness’ with God, that is my way of explaining simply what I mean.  The height of the blessing lies in the peculiar position in which we 
stand to God our Father.  That is the future which lies beyond us.  What a magnificent future!
  
Are these things given to us as theories?  What would be the result if they were held with power in our souls?  If God gives us anything in the future, it is that it should affect us in the present.

  Do you not think an appreciation of it would make things of earth dwindle into insignificance?  You must know heaven to leave earth.  You belong to this vast scheme, blessed for His own pleasure.  

  If that be so, it necessitates the revelation of God, and formation in God’s people answering to the revelation, if we are going to be before Him in love.
  I am acquainted with human life, I speak as a man formed to live here.  I am capable of enjoying human relationships, I am capable of understanding and enjoying human life, I understand nothing of heaven.  I speak not 
as a Christian, but as a man.  
But the humiliating thing is that I must die.  How great the anguish is - I must die!  To gain life I must die.  No matter what the human joy is, it comes to an end.

  But now, as a Christian, I have ability to understand heaven.  I am formed, have a constitution for it, which belongs to heaven, so that I can distinguish between what is natural and what is spiritual.

  I must not discard what is natural, but I can only behave properly in it as I understand what is spiritual.  What is natural fades away, but what is spiritual does not fade away.  What a magnificent thing!

  In Romans the one word which conveys the greatest thought is glory.  
Glory is there, which means what God is.  He does what He does because He is what He is, and all that God is in nature and character came to light in the lowest parts of the earth.  It shone there; Christ displayed it there.  Glory is the greatest word in Ephesians also.

  We sometimes think of glory as something we can see.  But God's glory is what He 
is in His nature and character, and we are to reflect His glory in what we are.  
‘Like Jesus in that place’,  I shall never think of myself.  It will be gone.  

  You are truly happy when you forget yourself entirely.  God proposes to present Himself in such a way that we shall -

forget ourselves entirely.
  Never throughout that blessed eternity, when this will be fulfilled, will you once think of yourself.  It is only natural to think of ourselves.  That proves our degradation.  The first fallen creature became occupied with his beauty and fell.  He forgot he was only a creature, and fell.  He wanted to be as God, self-sufficient, and he fell.  He 
will fall, and will be the most degraded creature in a lost eternity.
  Thank God that we are Christians, that we are delivered from that horrid principle.  A Christian has Christ, he has turned to God, and what will He do?  He will hold him to Himself, both now and for ever.  How I treasure these verses!  I look at them, I repeat them, and say, all my blessing lies there.  This is 
the generation of purpose.
  Do you weigh over these things and live in the power of them?  If I am wanted
 where Jesus is, I shall be taken care of where Jesus was.
  When you come to verse 11 you have the inheritance.  The mystery of His will is that God will head up all things in Christ.  It is a great thing to know that you are coming into 
sonship and heirship.  
It is ours now to enjoy.  Here it is in the future and the fulness of it, “in whom also we have obtained an inheritance”, &c.  I will put it practically.  Do you think if any one held this he would be making a fortune?  It is a most degrading thing to be here making a fortune.  I am simply -

left here to be educated
for my destiny.  I have to work with my hands and earn 
my living, but I am talking about people who have making a fortune as their aim.  It is most humiliating.

  If we were in the light of our heavenly calling we should act differently.  The question of our calling has been raised of recent date, but to apply it to one thing and miss the application to all things shews a lack of integrity.  If I belong to heaven it should separate me from all that is here.  

  God would have us upright; we need to see the application of these things to ourselves.  How far we are in the light of our heavenly calling would produce a testimony which is often lacking.

  A young Christian may say, How am I to know that I belong to this vast system?  I am only a little atom, and I think of a vast scheme where I 
see the glory of God in these proposals.  I say, how am I to know that I am a little stone in this “mosaic work”?  (I speak figuratively.) 

  I was in Italy, and once saw millions of little stones put together by the skill of man.  That is an illustration.  How lovely the scripture is!

  The apostle says, ‘Ye have trusted Christ’.  
He comes right down from purpose to soul history.  I must know that I am one of the little stones in it.  
‘Ye trusted Christ’.  What can be more simple and useful than the way in which a Christian is spoken of? 

The youngest child
- can say, “I trusted Christ”.  What made us trust Christ?  The word of truth, His grace, His mercy.  All truth is presented in Christ, and you were led to trust Him.

  The poor woman who came to Jesus put out her hand and touched the hem of His garment.  That touch said, “Lord, I need Thee”.  The garment had no seam; she little knew what she was in for.  All the fulness of the Godhead dwelt in Him bodily.

  Now look - after you trusted you were sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise.  
She touched Him by faith, and He touched her by the Spirit.  
I am leading you to Mark 5, where He said, “Daughter”.  She said in her touch, 
I need Thee.  
He said, I need you. 
  You were sealed: you touched Him by faith, and He touched you by the Spirit; and now you are one of the little stones in this vast structure of blessing.  It is the generation of purpose.  May the Lord expand our hearts in the sense that we belong to this vast scheme.  I was once having a meeting, and there was a sister whose husband was a great painter.  She was at the reading, and the effect of it was that she said to her husband, “I have seen a picture in Ephesians, and your pictures are as nothing to be compared with this one”.  This is the generation for the pleasure of God.  May the Lord in His goodness, by the consideration of it, enable us to truly enter into our portion.

___________________
  From ‘The Believer’s Friend’, 1918
 
  
A NEW GENERATION
John 20: 11-18; Acts 8: 30-33, 9: 5 ; Philippians 2: 12-16
  With regard to the Lord Himself, we read that He was cut off and had nothing.  It says in Isaiah 53, “Who shall declare his generation?”  The Lord had no inheritance; He had title to all, but He was cut off, and had nothing.  And not only so, but He had no generation.  I am referring to an aspect of His death which the scriptures present, not the atoning aspect.  The scriptures speak of the Lord in His true and perfect and holy humanity.  He had title to everything, and He was cut off and had nothing.  He had no generation; He felt it, He had the positive grief of it.  “He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days.  I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days”. (Ps 102)
  
He was cut off in the midst of His days.  Would to God that we entered more into His side of things!  He was cut off out of the land of the living!

  Now that introduces my subject, which is His generation, and how the Lord declares His own generation.
  My first point is to shew the generation in privilege; secondly, in suffering; thirdly, in testimony.
  He declares His own generation, He declares it in resurrection.  In the prophetic scriptures that speak of Christ and of His sufferings there is always the thought of generation.  The generation is the fruit of the travail of His soul.  “He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand”.  While He was cut off, and had no generation, “He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied!”  “He shall see his seed”.  

  In Psalm 22 you have the seed, the generation coming to light, and it is a generation for the praise of God; that is to say, the great thought of Psalm 22 is a worshipping generation.  In Psalm 49, another great sorrow psalm, which you get in the second book, it says His seed shall inherit; it is the reigning side.  In the third book of Psalms you have a seed answering to Him morally, which I shall be able to shew presently from the New Testament, but in Psalm 102.  His seed shall abide for ever, He puts the stamp of abidingness on His generation.

  His generation is declared in each gospel.  He declares His generation in His pathway here; in John He declares it in resurrection, in the other 
gospels the declaration of His generation precedes, or is connected with, the sowing of the seed.  He declares His generation in Matthew 12: 46-50.  He indicates as His generation those who shall do the will of His Father which is in heaven.  He declares it morally, He stretches out His hand toward His disciples.  He says, These are My generation, who shall do the will of My Father.

  Turn now to Mark 3: 31-35.  Here is the call of His mother to Him, and He says, Those who sit around are My brethren, those who do the will of God.  God could only be pleased with what is morally suitable to Himself, and the Lord Jesus came down here to procure a people who should be morally suitable to Him.

  You came to Christ in your great need, and so you got introduced to Christ; but I ask you, do you find pleasure in the thought that the reason why you came to Christ, and He received you, was that you should answer to what He is morally?  If you do not find pleasure in it there is something morally wrong in your soul.  Do you take pleasure in the thought that He came down here to find a generation for God, who shall delight in His will?  

  If you are a Christian you have come to Him.  What a beautiful thing it is that He says, These are My brethren!
  
Immediately after you have the parable of the sower; He sows the word in order to produce the generation.
  Now in Luke's gospel the order is reversed.  It is after the parable of the sower that you get the Lord saying, “My mother and my brethren are th
ose which hear the word of God and do it”. (chap 8: 19-21)  
“Do it”  
In all these three gospels you have the Lord indicating His generation.  They do the will of His Father which is in heaven; they do the will of God; they hear the word of God, and do it.  The sowing of the word is to produce a generation after this kind.

  Having said that much I come now to John's gospel, which is entirely different.  The poor woman here is in the garden, and she has great affection for Christ; she has no home where Christ is not.  I do not know whether we have reached that.  These disciples saw and believed, and went home, but this beloved woman lingered at the door of the sepulchre.  She was a most unintelligent woman, but one who had great affection for Christ, one who apprehended there could be no home where He was not.  
You might have said to her, Go home.  Peter and John have gone home.  No, she would have said, I will never rest till I find Him.  What entrancing affection!  

  The two angels are there, but all they say in this gospel is, “Woman, why weepest thou?”  The angels are sympathetic with her.  No angels bear testimony in John, the Lord does it Himself.

  In the three gospels I have quoted the resurrection answers to the transfiguration.  It is very beautiful to see it.  In Matthew there is a great stone rolled against the door of the sepulchre.  Poor puny man!  “He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision”.  They roll a great stone, but there was a great earthquake.  We often think of the great power down here with man, but when we get into the presence of the power of God man disappears.  The angel came and rolled “
away the stone and sat upon it”.  How majestic!  We are made to feel the powerlessness of man.  If we were in touch with heaven we should have the sense there is no power like the power of God.  It is all very majestic in Matthew.  

  Then he renders a testimony to those who come; it is the angel who speaks to those who are there in Matthew.
  When we come to Mark we see a young man sitting there clothed in white.  No one could bear witness apart from purity, therefore it says in the transfiguration, “His raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no fuller on earth can white them”, because power and purity go together.  If a testimony is to be rendered it must be by a man clothed in a white garment.  How in keeping that is with Mark.

  When you come to Luke, “Two men stood by them in shining garments”, this is what is heavenly.  In the transfiguration “His raiment was white and glistering”.  (Luke 9: 29)  

  But here in John no voice is heard, no angels could meet that poor heart that misses the Lord.  To me it is surpassingly beautiful.  “Woman, why weepest thou?”  It only elicited this: “Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him”.  The transfiguration is not recorded in John for Jesus is presented in His glory all through.

  The angels there are not attractive to her; no one is attractive to you when Christ is your Object: you will turn from anybody and everybody till you find Him.  Oh!  she says, if I could only find Him.  She thought of a dead body, but it was Himself she wanted; I must have 
Him, that is the point.  So she turns away from the angels, and turns from the gardener, as she supposes, and then His sweet voice is heard; no angel shall say it, He will say it Himself.  What will He say?  “Mary!”  Who could say “Mary” like Jesus?  “My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me”.  I know them; Mary!
  
Mary!  

  I will try and illustrate it.  No one could call my name as my mother could.  If my mother were outside and called my name I should know it now: no one could put such affection into it as she could.  No one could say “Mary” like the Lord.

  There is beautiful recognition here.  She answers back, “Rabboni”: she is with Him.  

  Though the supper is not here, we have in John's gospel what is behind the supper.  I understand the supper to be the appeal of love, and there is mutual recognition in the supper.  He is saying “Mary”, and we answer back “Rabboni”; we are with Him.  The supper has been instituted in order that we might recognise His love, hear His sweet voice; and there might be a response in our hearts to Him in such a way that we find ourselves with Him.  It is affection that finds itself with Him always.

  What happens now?  She springs forward, as it were; we infer that from the Lord saying, “Touch me not”.  She says, You have come back to be with me in my circumstances.  No, says the Lord.  What pleasure He had in saying it!  What compensation for the travail of His soul!  What an answer to His unutterable grief was the holy joy of that embrace - “Touch me not”.  I am come to tell you, you must come with Me.  I have made a way for you to come with Me; and He says, “Go to my brethren”, words that are simple to read but in which He finds His joy.  He embraces His brethren on the platform He had secured for them.  He is on His own territory; He is outside the region of death and weeping.  He says, Come to Me.  “Go to my brethren”.
  
He embraces His brethren; then He unfolds what it is in words that are excessively simple but very profound, and in which is our everlasting happiness.  “I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God”.  

  Have you ever known anything like that? - I ask you all.  I do not ask you if you have read the scriptures, but do you know this holy, unalloyed 
joy of association with Him the other side of death?  That is where He declares His generation; He declares it morally in the passages I have spoken of; but here it is His generation associated with Him, all having with Him that wondrous privilege of knowing His Father to be their Father, and His God their God.

  Now in regard to the supper, beloved brethren.  If we do not miss Him during the week, we shall not find Him on Lord's day morning.  It is the heart that misses Him who finds Him.  In the place where He was crucified there was a garden, and a grave; that is what the Lord has found here.  Have you the tender sensibilities of affection, that you go up and down this world and say, My Lord has only found a cross and a grave in this world of man's pleasure?  Years go by before we get any sense of it, but those who miss Him find Him.  We may get our moral sensibilities blunted by living in nature, and in things here, but we cannot step over it: those who miss Him find Him.

  You have known bereavement as we all have, how the shadow of bereavement lies on your spirit, and even the sunshine is tantalising to you, because you think of the one who has departed.  But, oh! beloved brethren, if we were in affection for the Lord, how we should miss Him!  You would keep on saying, He has been here, but He has gone; and when He was here in this condition of things with which I am familiar - this human life - He found a cross and a grave, that is all.  Do you think you would find your home in things here if you realised that?  We have to do what is right and proper, but it is in our spirits we miss Him.  Sweet it is to come week by week to answer to His appeal of love in the supper, and to find ourselves with Him and to feel the joyful embrace, “
My brethren”.  I cannot explain it to you, I am but a little child in these things, but I know what it is to taste it - the embrace.  He says, I am glad to have you; you are compensation to Me in all My sorrow.  My joy is greater in finding My brethren the other side of death; so the generation is declared on that side.

  What is the privilege of it?  His Father is our Father, and His God our God.  He bears us up there in the sense of that blessed relationship in which He stands, and we may have, in measure, His own feelings in regard to His Father, who is our Father, and to His God, who is our God; to have the same kind of feelings in our hearts towards His God and Father as He has.

  I tell you why He breathed into them and said, “Receive ye the Holy Ghost”.  
He not only declared the name, but breathed His own risen life into them.  Did you ever have the sense of that?  Once you taste that, you never forget it and you will never be satisfied till you get this holy joy again: it is a joy that you will never lose.

  I have known natural joy - I am not making little of that which is natural, it is of God, but the spiritual is infinitely greater - I have known in my greatest earthly joy that I must lose it; but when I have this joy of which I am speaking, my heart says,  I shall never lose it, it is mine for ever.

  This is what the Lord is proposing for you, and He declares His generation on the resurrection platform.  He does not leave it to angels to say it, He renders it Himself.

  Now I want to shew you that what produces such a generation is suffering down here.  I turn you now to the Acts, where that is indicated.  This is a very complete section.  At the end of chapter 7 there is a man full of the Holy Ghost, and he looks up ste
adfastly into heaven.  He is the first witness and martyr.  He sees “Jesus standing on the right hand of God”.  What is opened up now is a new metropolis: he sees Jesus where He is.  It is all over with Jerusalem as a centre, but there is a new metropolis opened up for Stephen; and so, too, the Holy Ghost turns our thoughts to Jesus where He is.
  
Did you realise that when we were singing the hymn? 
     O Lord, Thy glory we behold,
     Though not with mortal eyes.
  These mortal eyes have never seen the glory.  How can I see it?  By the Spirit; so that I may become cognisant by the Spirit of Jesus where He is, and know very well that the spot that claims Jesus is the spot that claims me.  I no more belong to this earth than Jesus did.  So this beloved man lays down his life; he is persecuted, but he looks up to heaven and sees Jesus there.  In his heart he had the peace of the place where Jesus is.  We are conscious of storms here, but God is in undisturbed repose.

  Stephen stands in that court house, and there is not a friendly face.  Is there any trepidation in his heart?  Not a bit; the unruffled repose of the place where Jesus is is in the heart of that man in the place where Jesus was.  They were gnashing with their teeth, and all the wild waves in the 
court house were saying, There is no help for him in God.  Oh! he says, there is.
  
There is not a flutter in his heart.  Is that open to me as I pass through this world, that I may have the peace of the place where Jesus is in the place where Jesus was?  Yes, it is.

  The man in chapter 8 had been to Jerusalem, but he finds no rest in ordinances.  
Jerusalem will not satisfy him, he comes back with a weary heart.  Who will satisfy him?  Jesus.  He was reading a roll; he was reading that wonderful chapter in Isaiah, but not the atoning part of it.  It says there, “the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all”.  But it was not that part he was reading.  “He was led as a sheep to the slaughter”, etc.  “He was cut off out of the land of the living”; he read that.  “Understandest thou what thou readest?” said the Lord's messenger to him.  The peculiarity of the passage is, that he was reading the part which speaks of His being cut off out of the land of the living.  He says, “Of whom speaketh the prophet this?”  It was Jesus.  Was Jesus cut off?  Yes, and had nothing.  Oh!  says he, it is all over with me; so he was baptised; and his baptism meant this, he accepted the cutting off.  If you accept the privilege you must accept the suffering.  If His life is taken from the earth my life goes too.

  Do you recognise the fact (how many of us do?) that Christianity is essentially a suffering thing: that we are not Jews?  A young lady said to me, 
‘l am greatly distressed and greatly tried.  How is it the wicked prosper, and God’s dear people have to pass through so many and such peculiar trials?
’  I said to her, 
‘We are not Jews, we are Christians’.  A Jew expected favour from God on this earth; we are Christians.  A great deal of prosperity here is the result of self-will and moral departure from the truth, and prosperity weakens us.  There is such a thing as the curse of prosperity.  Do not think so much of it.  God may permit circumstances to be such so that you may prosper, only it is excessively dangerous: you need special grace for such circumstances.  Christianity is essentially a suffering thing down here, but there is great compensation.  So we have to accept the suffering side; the eunuch did in his baptism.  He was cut off, and had nothing, and the eunuch accepted the situation.  Those who accept the situation in regard to suffering will know what it is to be sustained by glory.  All through, Christianity is a suffering thing; I beg your acceptance of that, it would save us from a thousand and one disappointments if we did.  Christianity in its essence is nothing 
here and everything there.  
I am not asking you to do anything extravagant, I am asking you to face out the fact that the generation is not only a generation of privilege but a generation of suffering.  If we have His place before the Father we have His place before the world.

  One other word.  The generation is down here to hold forth the word of life - that is, to be in testimony to God.  What a blessed thing!  The angels might envy us our position now.  I am left down here to set forth God.  That is the point where we come back to the gospels, doing the will of His Father, who is in heaven.  It is the answer in our hearts to the sowing of the word.  If I think of the sowing, the word is the revelation of God; if I think of the reception, it is an honest and good and upright heart; if I think of the realisation, it is joy.  What I enjoy becomes light to other people.  The word of God is the revelation of God to me, that I might receive it in uprightness.  I receive it, not with joy but in my conscience; it goes down and produces self-judgment in me, but the happy result is that it becomes life to me; and what becomes life to me is light to other people.

  “Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.  For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure”.  I ask you to consider such a thing, that it is possible for us to be down here for the will and pleasure of God.  It is an opportunity that is afforded us that will not be afforded us by-and-by, that in the midst of a generation where men are doing their own will, we are left here to set forth God.  Therefore God works in you.  How little we have thought of this passage!  How many times have I said, If I could only get some one to tell me how it is He works in me, and what it is He works in me!  Well, He works in me that which answers to what He is in Himself.  He presents Himself to me in Christ so that I might know Him, and He works in me the answer to what is in Himself - divine love.  If I think of God, He can say, I am, I will, I do.  I am, and because I am, I will and I do.  He wills that which is according to what He is, and He produces that which is according to what He is.  I am, I will, I do.

  Now let us look at the other side.  I am, but not the same as God, that is what He works in me; it is the answer in me to what is in Christ.  I could not be it without Him, because the revelation is in Him.  I am, I will, I do.  What we need to be exercised about is our 
being; often we think of doing.  
There is the being, the willing, the doing.  The doing is that He works in you efficaciously by the Spirit, the answer to Himself in love.  The divine stature of everyone of us lies in love.  That is your true I; that is, you are 
identified with what God is.  He is love, and that is your true I.  If I think of light, it is the revelation of God to me that becomes life in me, and that is light to other people.  “Holding forth the word of life”, that people may learn what God is in us.  Christ was God, there was the revelation of God in Him; but, beloved brethren, we are to hold forth the word of life.

  People ask sometimes about conversions.  I remember once going to see a man who confessed Christ in a gospel meeting.  A man came up to me and said, 
‘I have come to Christ through the preaching’.  I replied, 
‘I will come and see you to-morrow morning’.  
‘Yes’, he said, ‘I shall not be on duty’.  I went next morning, and in the course of conversation 1 said to him, 
‘When did this begin with you?’  
‘Oh’, he said, ‘it was Charlie did it.  Don't you know Charlie?  He did it
’.  He was a simple man.  
‘Charlie was a man I worked with, and he was converted three years ago and he lived so before me’.  He was holding forth the word of life; that is what we want, not fine preaching but fine living.  How easy it was to stand up and speak to a man whose conscience had been reached by a man working beside him on the railway.  That is what we want.  I have often said that if I were a tradesman I would like to be an evangelical tradesman, and give good weight.  I would not like to give the impression I was overreaching people; it is a horrid thing for a Christian to be like that.  I would like to give the people I meet with every day the impression that I had to do with God, and that I knew God.  You might have all the preachers in the world, but what affects people is 
life - “holding forth the word of life”, morally presenting God to people.  Such a generation becomes a testimony; it is setting forth what God is.  A generation according to purpose.  

___________________
  From ‘The Believer’s Friend’, 1918
  
THE DISCIPLINED MAN
Genesis 28: 10 to end; 48: 1-7, 14, 19; 49: 1, 2
  The need of the moment is not only to find a passing pleasure in the things brought before us in ministry but to meditate upon them, and give ourselves wholly to them in prayer and exercise.  

  With this in view I thought it would be profitable to look at Jacob, as presenting to us the disciplined man.  He stands before us as the man who was disciplined into his blessing.  He did not take the way Abraham did, he stands in contrast to Abraham, but he reaches the same point at the end.  This is suggested at the beginning of his history, and the end proves it.  I shall also refer to some points in his history with the thought of giving encouragement to any who feel that we are under peculiar discipline at this time.  I think that the history of Abraham and Jacob is far more interesting than that of Isaac or Joseph, though they are perhaps not so typical.  If we read Hebrews it brings before us the way in which faith wrought.  You will remember what it says in regard to Jacob, “By faith Jacob, when he was a-dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph; and 
worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff”.  He was a worshipper.  I do not know anything greater than that.  I do not know that there is anything said about that in regard to the others.  Jacob's history is intensely interesting.  His was a tortuous history and he had a stormy pathway, but he had a bright sunset.  He has a clear outlook: he is with God, he is looking at things in the light of God, he has reached what was proposed at the beginning, that is, the house of God, and he answers to the name which God gave him in chapter 32 and confirmed in chapter 35, he is Israel now.  Many of us know very well we have not walked normally, but it is a very great encouragement to know we are in the hands of our God, and that He is set for our blessing and will never let go His purpose.

  Whatever our ways may be He holds to His purpose and His purpose is to bless us.  What a magnificent thing that is, in the midst of our exercises and sorrows! God has given us the truth that it might be wrought in our souls, in order that there might be an answer to it for His pleasure.  We cannot play with these things.  There is a danger on our side of being engaged with it in a mental way, and finding mental pleasure in the consideration of truth; but what God wants to do is to reach the heart and conscience through exercise according to the light of the truth.  I am 
speaking now of divine knowledge: your knowledge lies in the knowledge of God Himself, and you reach that through discipline.
  Now the pattern of a disciplined man is Jacob.  He has a large place in the prophets and the Psalms.  God says in Psalm 24, “This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O Jacob”.  That is to say, they will be encouraged by-and-by with the mercy of God as shewn to Jacob.  They will say, 
‘If He was all that to Jacob!’  He proved the longsuffering of God, and Jacob turned into Israel.  Jacob is the natural man, the failing man, the man who needed to be disciplined into his blessing, and Israel by-and-by will come into blessing in that way.

  Now I will say a word suggestively on the features of discipline.  I think scripture presents discipline in four distinct ways.  There is corrective discipline, and that is presented to us in connection with the Lord's supper in 1 Corinthians 11; then there is 
preventive discipline, and that is connected with the Lord's people in His service.  In the case of the Apostle Paul in 1 Corinthians 12, we read of a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan sent to buffet him.  How the Lord cares for us in every way!  Now discipline is presented to us again in Hebrews 12, “Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth”.  There the discipline is not so specific, but is more 
general and formative, that we might be made partakers of His holiness.  That is the great point in Hebrews 12.  It is discipline that forms you.

  In John 15 we have reproductive discipline, which is sweeter than all.  It is the gracious way in which He purges us that we might bring forth much fruit.  Hence the four distinct features of discipline, as another has pointed out, are (1) corrective, (2) preventive, (3) formative, and (4) reproductive.

  Now let us consider Jacob.  He stands in contrast to Abraham; his way was exceedingly tortuous because of what he was.  He was a most crooked man, but he stands in contrast to Esau because God saw in that man's heart an appreciation of blessing.  He was not like Esau, who sold his birthright for a mess of pottage.  Esau was a nice man outwardly, but he did not appreciate his birthright.  But Jacob appreciated the blessing of God.  He took a tortuous way to get it, but he appreciated it.  The way he took to get the blessing was all wrong, and if you take a wrong course you have to suffer the consequences of it.  So Jacob had to flee from the wrath of his brother.  The deceiver was deceived.  That a man sows that shall he 
also reap.  But God had regard to that poor lad there in his loneliness.  It was night time, and if God visits you in the night it is that He might bring in the day.  God proposed to bless Jacob, and what he saw was a ladder which reached to heaven.  That suggests the thought of the future for this world, when the world will be no longer divorced from heaven.  What is the meaning of all the trial and tears and sorrow?  I would like you to get the moral reason for it all.  The reason is that earth is divorced from heaven; suffering is the result of the divorcement of earth from heaven.  We have to pray, “Hallowed be thy name.  Thy kingdom come.  Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven”.  But the time is coming when the divorcement will be over.  That is the solution of it: God's will will be done.  What a simple thing, but how profound and far-reaching!  This world is governed by 
man's will.  We pray, “
Thy will be done”.  There is no confusion in heaven, there are no tears, no bereavement, and why not?  All is under one will and all that will is love.  I would like you to get the moral sense of that in your soul; if you have been brought to God it is that you may understand the reason for all these things.

  Well, there was this lad, and it is very wonderful he was to be the one from whom should spring all the blessing that this earth awaits.  This earth will never be right until God's earthly people Israel have their place as the centre of all blessing for it.  Deuteronomy 32: 8 is the key of the ways of God.  All the nations of the earth are round the twelve tribes of Israel.  You cannot have anything here for man until Israel is established as the centre of the earth; and it is through this man, Jacob, that it is coming to pass.  The promise was given to Abraham that all the nations of the earth should be blessed through him, and it is confirmed here to Jacob.  Well now, he wakes up and he could not realise it.  How could 
he?  Think of the work that had to be done in him before he could appreciate such a thing; but God tells him the best thing at the start, and then works that he may be in the good of it at the end.  He said, “
How dreadful is this place”; but it was not a dreadful place to him at the close.  Then he makes a bargain with God.  He limits God.  He says in effect, If He brings me back then I will do so and so.  How little he understood the marvellous blessing he was taken up for, and yet at the same time there was confidence in God, feeble though it was; and he proceeds on his journey and God took care of him.  There is no communion with God, but God cares for him providentially.

  He works fourteen years for his wives and God takes care of him.  “Nevertheless I am continually with thee: thou hast holden me by my right hand”. (Ps 73: 23)  How sweet to know that God takes care of us, that He holds us.  Then he was disappointed and he had hard thoughts of God.  What an evil thing to have hard thoughts of God and yet be a Christian!  God knows all about it.  We say, He has denied me this, that and the other.  He will not keep anything back from you that is good.  He is good in what He gives, and He is good in what He withholds.

  Now in chapter 32 Jacob comes back, and he sees the angels of God and says, “This is God’s host”.  He was right doctrinally, but he was not right subjectively; although he said it, he went home and contradicted it in practice.  We say uncommonly fine things at our readings sometimes, but what do we do when we go away?  Do not you think it ought to exercise us?  This man said, “
This is God’s host”, and yet there he is trembling before his brother Esau, when the knowledge of God should have covered him.  We would have thought the host of God would have dispelled every fear, for God was saying in that revelation 
‘I am for you’.  Then he tries to pray.  Often we make our plans first, and then pray to God.  Let the truth come to expose you.  One of the greatest blessings of the moment is to know where you are in your soul's history with God.  God wants us to be in the reality of our true condition as in His sight.  Never mind about the brethren, it is what 
you are with God, that is the point.
  Well, all through this dark night it is the working of his will.  It is quite possible for people to be going on in the routine of what is proper from scripture, and yet not to be making a single step forward spiritually.  We cannot judge people merely by their outward interests, it is exercise that we want.  And so he went through this long night wrestling with God.  As long as your will works you will never make a step forward spiritually.  The Lord would call your attention to your present spiritual condition as in His sight.  I do not say that to cast you in upon yourself, but to bring you to God.  Jacob wrestled all night until the day was breaking, and he said, “I will not let thee go, except thou bless me”.  But God put His 
hand out and took the strength out of him, and brought him into a position where wrestling was over and communion came in ; and He said, “What is thy name?”  “Jacob”.  Thou shalt “be called no more Jacob , but Israel”.  God said, 
‘I will give you that name, and the same day you shall answer to it’.  He was beginning to answer to it in clinging.  He was a crippled man, but the sun was shining.  Oh!  how blessed it is, there he was ever to 
cling.  The sorrows that are deepest are the secret sorrows that no one could ever know but yourself and the blessed God who permits them to come upon you.  It is not what is visible to the eye, nor the greatest sorrow that you can speak of.  It is always there and always to be there, but you have the face of God shining on you.

  Then he went on from there, and he built an altar and called it “El-elohe-Israel,” and he called on the name of the Lord.  That is what God is to me.  It was very beautiful as far as it went, but, alas! the idols were still there, and so there was disgrace and trouble.  It always is so if you make 
yourself the centre.  The end of it was he said, You have made my name to stink and I shall perish.  He was in dire distress and he was afraid.  He was not with God.

  If you are with God you are not afraid of anybody save yourself.  People will be afraid of you; persecution is always the result of fear  that is the reason why God's people are persecuted.  “Then there was great fear, for God was in the congregation of the righteous”. 

  Then God says to Jacob, “Go up to Bethel”, and then he makes a move.  Every spiritual movement towards God is the result of the removal of that which hinders.  Jacob said, Put away the idols: we are going up to a holy place.  There was a great movement.  Are you on that line?  Are you moving towards God?  Do you desire to have communion with God?  Do you ever go to Him and say, 
‘I want to come near to you?’  What do you think He will do?  He will point out this, and that, and say, 
‘That is the hindrance; if you want to come near to Me you must put it away’.  It is the little fox that spoils the vine.  If you ask God to shew you what is the hindrance, do you not think He would delight to do it?  Suppose He does, are you prepared to give it up?  I beg your attention to these little exhortations.  Well, Jacob goes up, and he rears an altar and calls it El-beth-el.  Not El-elohe-Israel; not my blessing.  It literally means, 
‘God, the God of his house’.  You are in the house of God and your interests are with God, and you see everything in the light of God.

  Then God appears to him again and Jacob makes his start, for God reveals Himself now.  “I am
 the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect”, was what He had said to Abraham.  So now Jacob is free, he has got God before him 
- ‘God, the God of the house’.  Not what God is to me, but what God is in His house.  He puts up a memorial.  Abraham did not do that, though he was constantly with God, but he did not put up 
memorials.  In the house of God there is the memorial of Christ.  He pours a drink-offering on it.  He is on the line of what is agreeable to God.

  Does his discipline end now?  No; Rebekah's nurse died, then Rachel, and Jacob put up a pillar upon her grave.  It is to this he alludes at the close of his history.  He sees everything in the light of God's interests, his own interests disappear entirely.  He is a worshipper.  He has got clear of himself, he has clear perceptions now.  When you are in the house of God you begin to see everything in the light of the house of God.  As he looked upon Joseph and his sons, he said, 
‘You have earthly hopes, all my earthly hopes have gone ... Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little distance - only two miles to Bethlehem’.  As another has said, 
‘The grave of your earthly hopes is the birthplace of your heavenly hopes’.  I ask you here, in His blessed presence, is He not competent to fill up every breach?  Is it not greater gain to find Him, to find Christ?  If you have to travel through sorrow to get a greater knowledge of Him, it is the greater gain.  He is more than competent.  So out of the sorrow shall come the sweet singing, the valley of Baca shall become a well.  The Lord had a purpose to make known to me that I might sing my songs on stringed instruments.  So Hezekiah (New Trans.) said.

  Now he blesses the sons of Joseph, and he crosses his hands.  He has been stumbling about all his life, but his crooked pathway is all over now and he sees everything in the light of God's house.  Joseph said, 
‘You are making a mistake’.  
‘No’, said Jacob, ‘I have been making mistakes all my life, but I am not making a mistake now’.  He is in the light of the house of God.  How beautiful it is to see our blessed Lord in John 11.  We read, “Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus”; but that was not the governing principle.  The governing principle was the glory of God.  Will He not intervene?  No.  Is He unmindful of their sorrow? He was there in spirit; He saw them all through the days of darkness.  Was He unsympathetic?  No, He was not.  The bereaved hearts were dear to Him, but He would not intervene.  Why?  Because of the glory of God.

  I would like to call attention to this before I close.  Mary was there.  Isaiah 50: 10 gives us the condition in which Mary was.  She was in the dark, but she was trusting.  “Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light?”  What do you do then?  Mary was sitting still in the house.  Where 
do you learn to sit still?  At His feet.  I do not know what is going to be the end of this, but I will stay here until He calls for me.  “Let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God”.  Then it goes on, “Behold, all ye that kindle a fire ... ye shall lie down in sorrow”.  Are you looking round for sticks? you will always find sticks.  You get the sticks together and you say, 
‘That is very providential’.  In the dark Jacob was wrestling; in the dark Mary was trusting.  But the blessed Lord was in the light of day.  “Are there not twelve hours in the day?”  “Said I not unto thee, that, if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?”  Oh, for hearts to trust Him!  Not to be wrestling in the night of our self-will, but if we have no light let us tu
rn to God.  Let us not gather providential sticks; it we do we shall lie down in sorrow.

  Now let us return to Jacob for a moment.  Jacob said, “Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken unto Israel your father”.  He was a prophet, and he portrays in a remarkable way the history of God's earthly people from start to finish.  He had light, his eye was clear because he was delivered from his own interests.  This chapter gives us the whole history of God's earthly people from start to finish.

  May God in His great goodness be pleased to encourage every heart.  Do not cherish the hope that there are going to be easier times here in the future, but there is going to be, if the Lord delays His return, a very great awakening of affection for Christ.  If through your sorrow you get to know Him better, He will bring you forward to the very spot where the glory shines and maintain you there in all the brightness and blessedness of it.

_____________________
  From ‘Mutual Comfort’, 1918
  
THE PERFECT SERVANT
Exodus 4: 22, 23; Mark 1: 1; 16: 19, 20
  My object is to bring before you suggestively some of the marks of the true Servant.  I suppose we all know that the Gospel of Mark presents the Lord in that aspect; He is the Prophet, the true Servant.

  Someone has said, and I think it is right, that the disciples are looked at in Matthew as teaching, in Mark as preaching, in Luke as witnessing, and in John as sent by the Son, even as He was sent by the Father.
  It is a very great comfort that we have perfection in One.  While we have Paul, a wonderful servant, brought before us, who came closer than any of us to the Lord, yet perfection was only found in Christ.

  Paul and the testimony were one, as it were.  He was not severed from the testimony in any way; he was 
characterised by the testimony; he was the answer in himself to it, a man of like passions with ourselves.  Still, we have to feel the distance between him and the 
perfect Servant.
  We have perfection only in the Lord, and how sweet it is to look at His perfections and enjoy them.  However much we are made to feel how different we are in our imperfections, it is sweet to turn to Him, to look at Him and consider Him.  I wish we did it more.  If we looked at Him more we should become like Him morally.

  The Psalmist says, “Thy commandment is exceeding broad”.  Christ fills out all things - He fills out the commandment.  So we have in Mark the perfect Servant, and the perfect Servant is the Son of God.  It is the gospel of Jesus Christ, the 
Son of God.  We are introduced to Him in rather an abrupt way.  It says here, “the beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God”.  So we are presented at once with this perfect Servant.

  I want to shew you that the spring of all true service lies in conscious sonship; it is a very important thing to remember.  It has been said that the first time you get a thought as to a thing in scripture you get an indication of what it means.  I do not think you get any thought of service in Genesis, but the thought of it is in Exodus; we have here for the first time God's great thought as to service.  He speaks of Israel as His
 son, His firstborn; and sends Moses with this message to Pharaoh, “Let my son go, that he may serve me”.  That was the great object of their deliverance, not 
relief, though that was involved in it, but that they should serve Him.  It was because Israel was His
 son, His firstborn, “Let my son go, that he may serve me”.
  Then we know very well how Israel failed.  It is very interesting, and very touching too, to see the way by which they got off the line of grace and came under law.  Things were entirely altered when they placed themselves under law.  There could not be any service under the old covenant, no service that could be pleasing to God.  It is extremely touching, that immediately you have the giving of the old covenant, the first precept given to Israel was in regard of the Hebrew servant.  God hastened to tell us in type and figure that He had a Servant.  The servant had a title to go out free, but he says, “I 
love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free”.  He goes to the door-post, and his ear is bored through with an awl, that he may serve for ever.

  It is as if God were saying: ‘I have got My Servant, and it is through Him I am going to have you to serve Me’.  They put themselves under law; it was necessary in the ways of God that they should put themselves there, to learn what they were, as we have to learn what we are.

  The word service covers a wide range.  Service here is what is priestly; that is a very important principle.  It was not active service in preaching, as we understand it, it was in connection with the sanctuary - a priestly service according to God's pleasure.  He speaks of the perfect Servant, and the spring of that service is, “I 
love”.  
That is the spring of all true service; it involves the revelation of God, and He must give ability to answer to that revelation, so that every bit of service which is pleasing to God has for its spring, “I love”.  Service and sonship go together.  The way in which God recovers His people Israel is all through Christ, but it is very interesting when you come to Psalm 116, for the first time you get, “I love the Lord”.  It is really Christ on resurrection ground, voicing Israel's feelings to Jehovah.

  The apostle quotes it in 2 Corinthians 4, which throws light on it, and shews exactly what the psalm means - Christ in resurrection as Head for Israel voices their feelings towards Jehovah,  “I love Jehovah”.  The subject matter of the psalms ends very soon after that.  Psalm 118 closes it.

  If God has got the affections of His people, He has gained His point; He has won their affections that they may serve Him, so that all the service which will be rendered by Israel by-and-by will have for its blessed spring, “I love”. 
  It supposes that God has revealed Himself, and has given His people ability to answer to that revelation.  He turns their flinty hearts into fountains of waters, and there shall be a constant outflow, the spring of which shall be, “I love”. 

  The thought is extremely blessed that God shall not be disappointed in His purpose.  

  In Mark you come to the great Servant who is the Son of God.  Believe me, that is what we want to understand more, the blessedness of 
such a relationship which gives character to Christianity.  It gives character to the kingdom and to the house; it is the kingdom of the 
Son of His love, and He is Son over the house.
  Sonship gives character to everything; it is most important, so we have it here in this precious gospel.  We are made to feel that the writer appreciates what he is writing about, because he is presenting the Lord in His perfection.  Mark failed in his service, he turned back, but he was graciously restored, and God took up such a man to write about the true Servant.  

  I think you will find that his pen at times is tremulous, because he is speaking of the perfect One in the line in which he broke down himself.  What I want to shew from this is that we are introduced to the Son of God.

  What is so peculiar to Mark is the way in which He did things.  The service of Mark is carried out in the communion of John.  Behind all the unceasing activity of Jesus was the unbroken communion in which He dwelt; He was ever in the blessed place of sonship, and ever enjoyed blessed, unbroken communion with the Father.

  Nothing could interrupt the outflow of good.  You see not only that, but you see the 
way in which He did things.  There are certain things here which are peculiar, it is the style of His service.

  There is a certain delicacy of touch in His service which comes out here in a remarkable way.  There was divine sympathy.  If He touched 
anyone He made them feel the sympathy that went with it.  I think what we lack is sympathy.  We say things that are perfectly true, but we want the feeling that goes with it.  There is such a thing as divine compassion, that God-like, deep compassion which flowed out from Him. It is the 
way in which a man says a thing that affects me most; not only what he says, but the divine feeling that goes with it.  So we are edified by 
the spirit of a man.
  That is the way in which to judge of ministry, it is the divine feeling that goes with it, not natural feeling, but divine feeling: your spirit is impressed with that which is divine when it has been ministered.  “He sighed deeply”.  
“He looked up to heaven”.  There was no hardness, no, none.

   It is very wonderful to look at Him in that way; He felt for man.  I wish we had more of this feeling.

  I think where we lack is, that we are too doctrinal.  We may discuss things clearly, but it is the feeling that goes with it that shews whether God is there.  We want to seek it and cultivate it, and pray about it.  May God grant us grace that we may do so.

_______________________
  From ‘The Believer’s Friend’, 1919
  
THE PERFECT SERVANT
(Continued)
Exodus 4: 22, 23; Mark 1: 1; 16: 19, 20
  There is another point: in His manhood He was morally with God; as a Servant He was so.  How very wonderful it is!

  The very first sphere of His service was in that synagogue where the scriptures were read every sabbath day; the letter that kills was there, and the man with the unclean spirit passed muster every sabbath day.  The Son of God came where he was, and there was exposure.  He brought such power with Him, that the man who passed muster with the people, who had the letter, was so exposed that he cried out, “What have we to do with thee, thee Jesus of Nazareth?”

  What we want to cultivate is to be with God.  The beloved apostle of whom we have spoken presents it very beautifully at Philippi.  He was very grand there.  He finds only a few women going to pray: he had discernment to see where God was, with the excellent of the earth.  “By 
a river side, where prayer was wont to be made; and we sat down, and spake to the women”.  All true service is carried out in 
patience, and patience is the proof of power.  He knew where God was and where Satan was.  He refused Satanic influence, and he went with the praying women because 
God was with them.  

  How we lack in this, and it proves our condition: we ought to be exercised about it.  You must answer to the testimony morally yourself, it must be so.  It is difficult to speak of it, because one feels how faulty one is oneself; still one speaks of it with the desire that there may be with us such personal, close, secret exercise, that we are answering ourselves to what we say.

  The spring of His service lay in conscious sonship in communion with His Father,  He was never fevered in His service.  How wonderful to see Him there!  He went out and prayed all night.  Peter was a feverish man; he loved the Lord, and his blessed Lord was sought after.  It gratified his heart that his Master was sought after
 - “All men seek for thee”: ‘Why are You out here in this solitude when all seek Thee?’  The blessed Lord said, “Let us go into the next towns”.  He was not elated by success, nor depressed by non-success.  How perfect He was in it all!  

  Some one has said that the blessed Lord was never flattered into a wrong judgment, and never slighted into a wrong judgment.  He was superior to flattery and superior to slight: He was absolutely with God.  How often we are flattered into a wrong judgment or slighted into a wrong judgment.  He never was, He was absolutely perfect.  His service was perfect because it was the result of the communion in which He dwelt.  

  Then another thing, He looked, up to heaven.  The gospel closes for us with our headquarters.  The true servant's headquarters are in heaven, and the gate of heaven is found in the assembly; that is very important.

  The heavens were opened to Him in a way they could not be opened to us; the heavens are open to us, and He is our Object in heaven.  That is realised in the assembly; keep that in mind.  There is such a thing as personal communion and personal direction, but to know the mind of the Lord you must come into the assembly.  You will get your subjects and your direction when you are with the saints, as you will not get them in your close
t.  

  Pardon me if I speak of myself.  I once went to a place, I felt I ought to go, and I did not know the line I was to take there.  I thought, I will go and break bread there, and I will look to the Lord to indicate the line I am to take during the visit.  The whole line was mapped out for me in the morning meeting.

  I had got half way through it when an aged brother came to me and said, ‘Some of us had private prayer before you came, that you should take the line you have taken’.  I only refer to that because I feel the deep importance of it.  

  We cannot be independent in such a thing as this.  A man who goes on his own line independent of the assembly will come to grief.  We are to be subject to each other.  If a man is called to a certain line of service, he must keep in mind that he belongs to the assembly, and he is amenable to the discipline of the assembly.

  My third point, then, is that heaven is our headquarters, and the gate of heaven is found in the assembly, as is shewn in Acts 13.  The Holy Ghost said, “Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them”.  That is a happy principle there.

  We are in days of ruin, but we have to keep to these things.  If we want to be in the leading of the Spirit we must acknowledge these principles.  Barnabas and Saul were sent out from the assembly.

   I believe in the laying on of hands.  I do not believe in a man getting up and disregarding his brethren; not that he is to be
 guided by his brethren, but he has to be confirmed, and confirmation is given in the assembly.
  Then there is another thing: we must have private victories.  The Lord was with Satan and the wild beasts at the beginning of this gospel.  All public triumphs follow private victories.  When David came out he knew the strength of Jehovah with the lion and the bear.  Here is your drill ground, here you go through your discipline.  We have to go through things with God in secret history before we can be distinguished publicly.

  I think there would be unfolding of gift in the assembly, as the candlestick teaches us.  The branch is dependence, the knob is distinctness, and the flower unfolding.  There must be dependence on Him, and then there is distinctness.

  We are all servants, the sisters too.  It says, Phoebe was a servant of the assembly at Cenchrea, and there are others spoken of as helpers with the apostle.  We are all called - to be servants; some may have a special line.  There would be distinctness, some taking one line and others another.

  We think too much of preaching.  I would like to see brethren so exercised in the assembly that they may take lines of service which would commend themselves to the brethren.  And let us wait on what we are called to do, and there will be the unfolding of it.

  God orders our circumstances; He knows when we are born, and He knows what He has for us to do.  Sometimes we get irritated by everyday life, and want to work it off, but you may depend upon it, it is your drill ground.  

  Peter was fishing and John was mending.  The Lord said to Peter, You come from your fishing, and to John, You come from your mending.  They had to leave father, and brethren, and boats.  

  It indicates the line of service the Lord was going to bring them into.  John always mends the net; his ministry helps to keep up your communion.

   God ordered the way of the Apostle Paul.  He says, “Who separated me from my mother's womb”.  And God is over all your circumstances too.  God has His eye upon us for a certain purpose, and it is a very great thing to be exercised with regard to it, and to find it out
. 
  May the Lord in His great goodness be pleased to bless these remarks, and may we not forget the first principle, from which everything takes its character, that every bit of true service is rendered in conscious sonship, and has its blessed spring in these words, “I love”.  Amen.  

Be Thou the Object bright and fair
To fill and satisfy the heart;
Our hope to meet Thee in the air,
And nevermore from Thee to part :
That we may undistracted be
To follow, serve, and wait for Thee.
__________________
  From ‘The Believer’s Friend’, 1919
  
UNITY
Zechariah 2: 7-14; 14: 5-7
  It is a very great exercise to speak on such an occasion as this.  
I desire that the Lord may give a word directly from Himself, so that our present need may be met.  
It is quite possible to say something perfectly true and interesting, and a passing pleasure might be found in it; still it might not be a word from the Lord.  
That is what makes it so serious to get up and speak to you.  Hence 
it is absolutely necessary that both speaker and hearers should be found together in exercise.  
I wonder how many here have been exercised as to these meetings.  
Exercise leads to prayer - to desire.  
How many of us are found here in faith - waiting on the Lord?  We are tested as to how far we can count on His love, expecting from Him that which will meet us in our present need.  Though I feel it serious to speak, yet I feel encouraged in the thought that the Lord cares for us, and can meet all the exigencies of the present moment, and prove to us the way of His love in a very peculiar and blessed manner.  He is still the Blesser of His people, and our need will only bring out the strength of His unchanging love.

  We could not expect anything from Him on the ground of our faithfulness.  A spirit of pretentiousness would be very distasteful to the Lord.  I hope we have chastened spirits, the effect of being in His presence.
  
What has happened, what is happening, and what will happen should make us very serious.  We have never passed through such times, yet they are blessed times because they will bring out what the Lord can be to us.  The pressure will not cease, it may be increased, it may assume another form, but pressure there will be until the Lord comes.  Do not anticipate its removal, but greatly anticipate what His love can do for us.  Hence we must not look back regretfully at the past, but if there is any future accorded to us here, let us look forward most hopefully.  It is better on before, only we are in danger of being swept away.  Being in fellowship and having taken a certain position will not save us.  The needed thing with each is downright exercise of soul.

  I have said all this by way of preface.  I might have chosen other scriptures to bring my subject before you, but I have read these as suiting that which is pressing on my spirit, I trust from the Lord, the subject of UNITY.
  
Appreciation of Christ always produces unity, and unity always secures blessing.  
I want to bring it before you in connection with the Spirit of Christ as being necessary to it.  
His blessed Spirit is seen in the last scripture which I read.  
Many are anticipating unity, it is in their minds, but to us it is exceedingly painful, because we know it is vain and futile.  They hope that peace will be secured by the unity that is in 
their minds, but it is all in vain.  
If you think of unity down here, you will find that it is God's intention to bless this earth through a unity produced by the Spirit of Christ.  

  If you go back to Genesis 11 we get there the moral springs of that which has happened since.  Men sought unity in connection with 
their own glory.  They proposed to build a tower that would reach to heaven, in order to make a name for themselves.  This attempt to secure unity in connection with their own glory was frustrated.  They sought to build a tower from that which was of this earth.
  
They made brick, and slime had they for mortar, but nothing having its origin in earth can reach heaven.  
The only thing that can reach heaven is that which comes down from heaven.  
We are born from above and hence heaven is our portion.  
The attempt to build a tower was frustrated and confusion was the result.  

  God called Abram to be the heir of the world, and his call indicated that God had created this earth for His own glory.  
It was “the God of glory” that appeared to him and by His call indicated that He purposed blessing for man, saying, “In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed”.  Whatever may happen, God always keeps to His purpose.  Nothing thwarts Him.  All the counsels and efforts of men come to nothing.  If we were nearer to God, we should see what a poor puny creature man is, but away from Him our thoughts of man are exaggerated.  Hence it is repeated to Isaac and again to Jacob that the nations of the earth should be blessed in them.  It was a very small beginning, was it not?  but a great comfort to read that which the Lord said in Isaiah
 51: 1, 2, “Look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged.  
Look unto Abraham  your father, and unto Sarah that bare you: for 
I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him”.  Out of that solitary couple God has blessed and is blessing to-day.
  
That is God's way.  
He begins  from Himself.  The gospel opens with this fact, that Jesus Christ was the son of Abraham.  

  Let me recall to your memory the time when Jacob slept by the road side, a lonely stranger, away from his father's house; there was a ladder, not a tower, but a ladder that reached to heaven, and the angels of God ascending and descending on it, that speaks of intercourse between heaven and earth.  
How beautiful is that!  A number of sad things are happening which we feel, and rightly feel if we are with God.
  
I do not believe in people being Stoics.  The reason of all the sorrow is that earth in people's minds is divorced from heaven, but by-and-by that will be over.  It is a great thing to see that: it will give stability, and prevent your being carried away by the thoughts of men.  A confederacy is coming to pass as surely as it took place in the days of the tower of Babel.

  When Jacob was at the end of his course, he prophetically goes through the history of that which would befall his sons in the last days.  When we are in the light of the glory of God, we get a fine outlook, so this prophetic vision of Jacob gives the history of the people from the start to the finish.  When he comes to speak of Judah, it is Christ that fills his vision (Christ is seen both in Joseph and Benjamin) but Shiloh was to come of Judah, and Jacob says, “Unto him shall the gathering of the people be”.  There is going to be unity, but He is the Person that will secure it; it will be upon earth mediatorially through the twelve tribes of Israel.  The key verse to these ways of God is found in Deuteronomy 32: 8.
  
“He set the bounds of the peoples according to the number [that is, the twelve tribes] of the children of Israel”.  There will not be blessing on this earth until there is unity in Israel.
  
The twelve tribes must be united, but this comes from their being brought under the anointing of the true Aaron and drinking of the dew of heaven.  It will be in their appreciation of Christ that the twelve tribes of Israel will be knit together, and through that unity will be the blessing of the nations. (See Ps 97)

  What can be more touching than this passage in Zechariah 2.  I want you to see what God's thought is.  Zechariah is a very rich prophet  richer than any other save Isaiah.  The blessed Lord is before us here, He is here seen as the Shepherd in the midst of the flock.  You have Matthew's gospel in a nutshell.  They were a flock of hatred towards Him, but He was there to feed them.  Blessed Shepherd!  How we need a Shepherd!  “The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him: but his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob”. (Gen  49: 23, 24)  That is verified in Psalm 22.  Then we have further, “From thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel”.  How beautiful scripture is!  Psalm 23 must follow Psalm 22.
  
What a Shepherd for Israel!  He had been hated and grieved and shot at, but He shepherds the poor of the flock.  See where His love led Him!  He was the staff “Beauty”, but they abhorred Him and hated Him.  
Beloved brethren, you will never find out your badness from a book, you will not discover it until you have learned the true character of human nature, that when Jesus was presented to your natural mind, you abhorred Him.  Many of us never reach it save in theory.  We may know 
the doctrine that in the flesh there dwells no good thing, but I mean more than that.  The real sense of it would break you up, and lead you to appreciate Christ.  To use one of our current coins, 
‘the removal of the man’ that must be realised, but no one could ever appreciate the ‘removal of the man’ till they have learned the true character of the man.  You learn it by way of contrast.  What a contrast to Christ is fallen man.  The Almighty God put Himself in the presence of His creatures, and He asked the price they would give for Him - “Give me my price”.  Think of it!  They weighed for His price thirty pieces of silver - the price of a slave!

  I speak in fear and trembling, but let me say that our spiritual growth is not measured by our knowledge, it lies in the appreciation we have of Christ.  Do we not hear His voice at the supper saying, as it were, “Give me my price” (that is, At how much do you value me?).  I am fully aware that the supper is introductory to the privileges of the assembly, but in it He appeals to us, “Give me my price”.  Pay attention to it, dear brethren.  How it should come home to us!  I do not know anything more sanctifying than the supper.  It is love's appeal to us every Lord
’s day, and your spiritual growth lies in the value which you set upon His love.  There may be great ability to expound scripture and so on, but with it all there should be increasing affection for Christ.  He looks upon every one of us and He sees how our hearts are in relation to Himself.  We shall value our brethren rightly as we value Christ.  If all the dear brethren spoke of me as a spiritual man, the great matter would be, What does God think of me?  He sees where I am in relation to Christ, for He prizes affection flowing out to His dear Son, though it may be imperfectly.

  I verily believe that some of us think that spirituality lies in correct statements.  No, it does not, it lies in affection for Christ.  One would not desire that saints should be unintelligent, but let intelligence be the result of affection.
  
What did Thomas say - ignorant  Thomas?  He only saw the Jews and how they sought to stone Jesus, but 
He walked in the light of God His Father, and saw neither Jews nor stones.  
Thomas said, “Let us also go, that we may die with him”.  Very ignorant, but very affectionate, full of affection.  Surely the Lord prized that: He did.  Life is not worth the living where Jesus is not - so we may regard the words of Thomas.
  
I am not putting a premium on ignorance; but mark well, that spirituality does not lie in correct statements.
  There was another ignorant person, yet full of affection: Mary Magdalene - she only thought of Jesus as being dead, and she sought His dead body.  “Tell me”, she said, to the supposed gardener, “where thou hast laid him
, and I will take him away”.  The Lord prizes such affection.  Thomas said, “Let us go that we may die with him”, and Mary said, as it were: I have no home where Jesus is not.  Are you conscious of decline?  Listen, and let Him speak to you! “Give me my price”.  What will you sacrifice for Him?  That is the point.  I see men who will lay down their lives for their country.  What will we do for Christ?  What trifling things worry us, shame on us! What will you give up for Christ?  What are you prepared to sacrifice for Him?  Let it come home to each one.  Are you prepared to suffer for His sake?

  The religious leaders of Israel prized Him at thirty pieces of silver, and with the money they bought a field to bury strangers in.  
It was called the field of blood.  Now mark the Spirit of Christ speaking through the prophet, He accepts their valuation, and breaks His other staff “Bands”.  As a living Messiah He ceases to be the bond of brotherhood between Judah and Israel.  Now pass on to chapter 13; there the Spirit of Christ again speaks, not as taking the place of a prophet but as accepting the position brought in by Adam - “I am no prophet, I am a tiller of the ground; for man [Adam] acquired me as bondman from my youth”.  Is that how Jesus is known?  Was there ever such a Person?  He who subsisted in the form of God taking the form of a bondman, and as such He became obedient unto death to serve guilty man.  Do we take the place of service to the saints?  Who is the greatest man in the meeting where you are?  The man who is in the Spirit of Christ, and is marked by the love of Christ.  Why are we not charmed with that?  Why are we charmed with that which is official, which often gives a spirit of pretentiousness?  The greatest man in the meeting is the man who is the servant of all in the love of Christ.  Where the love of Christ is present in a meeting there will be unity.  Where there is no gift in a meeting, there is often more spiritual prosperity than in a meeting where there is gift.  You cannot 
localise gift, it is for the whole church of God.  The moment you localise it you spoil it.  I say these things that you may be exercised.

  Where there is unity there is blessing.  
There is gathering power if we love each other.  
No matter how few there may be, if there is lowliness God will bless.  There will be the recognition of our nothingness, but God will be praised.
  
Where there is unity, there will be the outflow of praise.  I could indicate it from other passages, such as Psalm 132; unity is realised when the ark of the covenant finds its place.  There is the delight of David as he dances before the ark.
  
He takes no place of prophet or of king, but he found his joy, because the ark of the covenant had been brought into its place.  His wife (Michal), who was full of proprieties, despised him in her heart.  In her eyes he was making a fool of himself.  She was a true daughter of her father Saul, who said, “Honour me now ... before the elders of my people”.  She despised the man who would take off his kingly robes, and dance before the Lord in the joy of his heart.  Hence she was not fruitful; legal people are not fruitful.  In the Book of Psalms there is a moral order and Psalm 133, “Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!” follows Psalm 132.  The secret is in being near Christ.  Let us avoid questions which gender strife.
  
He is now saying to us by the Spirit, “Come near to me, I pray you” as Joseph said to his brethren.  If I understand the movement of the Spirit, I think that is what Christ is saying; and as we have “come near” to Him, so we come nearer to each other.

  May the Lord be pleased to bless what I have tried feebly to bring before you.  I have endeavoured to shew you how unity is brought about in the future by the appreciation of Christ, and it is brought about now in the same way.  In Psalm 132 the ark of the covenant is going up to its place on Zion, and in the Epistle to the Ephesians we see Christ set in His place at the right hand of God in the heavenly places.
  
Then in chapter 3 we have the true subjective state of the assembly, and Christ dwelling in the hearts of His saints by faith - thus we may say there is a resting-place for Christ maintained by the Spirit down here, and hearts drawn out to Him in affection and also to one another.  May we realise it, beloved brethren, and if you are conscious of anything inconsistent with unity in the meeting where you may be, may this word produce exercise as to it.  May we each be able to say, as it were, “I am no prophet” - but take the low place, ready to be the 
servant of the saints in the Spirit of Christ.  May God grant it for the sake of His own dear Son.

__________________
  From ‘Mutual Comfort’, 1919
  
THE RICHES AND GLORY OF GOD'S GRACE
This article and the following two are gospel addresses in London published together in a booklet with this title
Luke 7: 36-50
  I wanted to read two other passages farther on in the gospel, but I may be detained by what is proposed in the chapter before us, so I will refrain from reading the other two passages which were before me, as this one is the most important.
  Now I suppose we may safely say that a verse found in the Epistle to Titus would be a very fitting title to this precious gospel from which I have read this passage - I refer to that scripture which says, “The grace of God which carries with it salvation for all men has appeared”.  Now I take that to be a most fitting title to this precious gospel in which we have so prominently the grace of God set forth.

  There is just one remark I would like to make in passing: we have all heard of the grace of God; it is impossible to be brought up in a country like this without knowing something - in the letter of it - about the grace of God; but there is such a thing as tasting the grace of God; knowing it in your soul, not only hearing it and holding it as a dogma, but tasting it; and when you have tasted it you do not forget it.  I hope that any who have never tasted that the Lord is gracious may begin to taste that grace this evening.  May God grant it.

  My thought is to bring before you three points.  The first is in this passage and is this: God's attitude of grace toward all men in forgiveness.  That is where you begin to taste that the Lord is gracious - in forgiveness; indeed this narrative which I have read shews to us plainly and clearly our first introduction to Christ as the Saviour.  That is your first introduction to Him; you know Him as your own precious Saviour.

  Now my thought was to read a passage later on which sets forth the riches of God's grace as seen in the story of the good Samaritan.  Then, thirdly, the glory of God's grace as set forth in the story of the prodigal.

  These are the three presentations of the grace of God and form great landmarks in the gospel - God's attitude of grace toward all men in forgiveness; that is where you begin to taste that God is gracious.  Secondly, the riches of His grace are set forth in the good Samaritan - you 
remember the story.  
Then the glory of His grace is seen in the reception of the prodigal; that is the glory of His grace.  The two latter expressions are seen in the Epistle to the Ephesians.

  Now if I were asked what I considered in my experience of preaching the gospel to be the scripture used more than any to the blessing of souls, I should immediately refer to the passage before us, because we have so livingly before us a sinner coming to the Saviour, and the reception of that sinner so simply and so vividly, that it has been used in the bringing to God of thousands.
  One remark I would like to make, that when we are reading the gospels and reading about Jesus, the precious Saviour, the Son of God, we must remember that He is the same to-day as He was then, as you see Him there in the narratives.  As He is in this passage, so is He now; the words that fell from His gracious lips have the same divine meaning and power now as then.  That is what makes it so intensely interesting.  He is a long way from this world, He is at the right hand of God, having accomplished the will of God and finished that blessed work whereby the grace of God can reach us; He is alive at the right hand of God; but His words are living, and the Spirit of God is here to make the reality of His words living and efficacious in our souls.

  Another thing, and please pay close attention to it, is that men are just the same morally now as they were when Jesus was here; so that when you are reading the gospels - such a passage as this - where you get this woman and Simon, they are represented by millions to-day.  It is not a bit of history you are reading, something historical, but similar people are alive now.  That is what I want you to see, it makes the scripture so intensely interesting.

  This woman is alive now; there are many here in our meeting.  Do you recognise that?  They have taken this way and have had this gracious reception; they have heard His voice - not only read it - but heard it in their souls livingly.  I would like you to have the sense of that.  It is like what a boy once said to his mother.  His mother asked him, 
‘What are you reading, Johnnie?’.  
‘Oh’, he said, ‘I am not reading, I am looking at Jesus raising Lazarus’.  
Looking at it.  Do you see the difference between reading a bit of history and reading the scripture?  
‘I was looking at Jesus raising Lazarus’.  That is the way to read scripture.  It was living and real to him.

  People are to-day morally the same.  I would like to press that upon you.  One of the reasons why I love the scriptures so much, is that I am told the naked truth about myself.  God never flatters me, He tells me what I am, and He shews me in these personages what I am.  I thank God for it.  That is why the scriptures are not liked.  God never flatters man; He puts him in his right place.  What for?  That you may find that the good that is in God is greater than the evil in you.  You must come down to find Christ.  You must come down to Him.  Take that in.  Jesus, who was here in Simon's house, is the same to-night as He was then.  His words have the same meaning now as they had then.  The Spirit of God is here to bring home in mighty power the words that fell from His gracious lips; they have their own true meaning at this moment.

  Let us look at the incident.  I did not read the whole of it.  It is your first introduction to Christ, the way you are introduced to Christ in the reality of what He is.  The incident you well know.  I will recall the fact that over the incident is written this verse, “But wisdom is justified of all her children”.  That is the text which stands - if I may be allowed to put it like that - over the incident, and immediately we are introduced to this man who invites the Lord to his house.

  Now there is a man here named Simon, and he invites the Lord into his house.  Whatever induced that man to invite Jesus to his house?
  
There are thousands of Simons, and, thank God, there are thousands of Wisdom's children still.  May you be one of them.  Simon invited Jesus into his house.  Other guests were welcome, but not Jesus.  Other guests had water given them, not Jesus.  He was sadly neglected in Simon's house; He felt it, but He kept silence; He felt it and noted it.

  Whatever induced that man to invite Jesus to his house?  It is a principle we are in the presence of at this time; he sought to patronise Christ.
  
He never came here to be patronised; He came here to be trusted and loved, the blessed Son of God.  Simon thought to add something to his own dignity; he thought that He was a prophet, and so He was, more than a prophet of course - and he invited Him to his house, but there was not a single pulsation in that man's heart towards Christ.
  
Is there one in yours, one single pulsation in your heart towards Christ?  
Has He endeared Himself to you?  
O sad and desolate is the heart that knows Him not.  He is there in Simon's house, but He is waiting for His child.  He is waiting for you.  Where is His child?  A sad and weary heart; a sin-
convicted soul.  He is waiting for His child, and she is wending her way towards Him.  May you wend your way towards Him as you sit there; wend your way to Jesus in your sinfulness and weariness in all that bitter past; may you come to Him.  She wends her way and she entered Simon's house, drawn there by her deep need.
  
That is where you learn the reality of Jesus, by your deep need.  Have you need?  

  I love to tell God in that psalm I quoted in my prayer that He numbers and names the stars; the infinitude of God is seen in that; He spangled the heavens and upholds it by the might of His power; but He heals the broken-hearted.  
Jesus has stooped down to my poor broken heart and has healed it, and He is greater in doing that than in creating the universe.  May you be conscious of His interest in you; may the preacher be forgotten and His Master, the Lord Jesus, be in presence, so shall there be blessing to your heart.

  She wended her way and stooped down.  Not a word escaped her lips.  She feels safe there.  She stands behind Him and she takes down her hair and anoints His feet and wipes them with the hairs of her head.  The woman's glory has come down to wipe His feet.  “How beautiful are the feet of 
them that announce good tidings”.  His feet were beautified by the grace of God.  He is God's Son and He brought the grace of God down here to poor wretched man.  She stands behind Him and she weeps.  What a place at which to weep!  Yes, that is the place to weep.  Have you not read in the scripture, “Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: 
where is the house that ye build unto me? and where is the place of my rest?  For all those things hath mine hand made ...  saith the Lord: but to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit”.  He who is poor and contrite in heart.  I will look on such, says the Lord.  Yon cannot do anything for God.  It is no good people trying to patronise Christ.  He does not want that; He wants you - your love.  You cannot do anything for Him, He wants to do all for you.  She stood there behind Him.  She washed His feet with her tears and wiped them with the hairs of her head.

  Simon looked on with a dark frown on his brow.  He had no appreciation of Christ.  Look at Simon - I am rich; I am religious; I am respectable; I am clever; I am this, that, and the other.  That is Simon.  But she says, I am nothing - but she found Christ there.  I found Him there, and you will find Him there.  I am nothing.  That is where you find 
Christ.  Do you say, 
‘I am religious’, or ‘I am respectable’?  All that keeps you at a distance, but the moment you come down to 
‘I am nothing’ - on this man will I look, says the Lord, I will look on him that is of a contrite heart.
  Simon sits there with a dark frown on his brow, wrapped up in all the pride of what he was; he had no appreciation of the mercy that was there.  He says, “This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him”.  The Lord read his thoughts, even as He read the dark history of that woman; every dark blot was under His eye.  He read the darkening thoughts of that man.  If the woman had said anything-nothing is related as to what she said, she is silent there - but if she had said anything she would have said, 
‘You speak for me, Lord.  I cannot meet this man
’.  She knew her dark history, her blotted past, she could not meet a man like that.  The Lord said, I will speak for you.  If you are Wisdom's child He will justify you.  If you take your true place before Him He will justify you.  “Wisdom is justified of all her children”.  He justifies His child.  How simple it all is.  Let me tell you, the way of salvation is put simply, it is for simple people.

  The Lord said, “Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee”.  He said, “Master, say on”.
  
Then briefly, pointedly, and powerfully He puts before us the situation.  How magnificent the words!  So simple that a child can understand the force of them, but how profound and far-reaching!  

  “A certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty.  And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both”.  Behold in these words the mind of God - the situation which has for its moral foundation the precious blood of Christ.  If grace is to reach down to us it has its righteous foundation in the precious blood of Christ.  He who uttered these words was going to the cross to make it good and efficacious by His death.  He was wending His way to Calvary's bitter cross to lay down the righteous foundation of that which is underlying these words.
  
“When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both”.  That is, He graciously forgave them both.

  It gives me the greatest possible joy to say that.  In these words you may learn the attitude of God in grace toward all men - all men.  That is it.  He has no judgment in His mind; this is the day of grace, it is not the day of judgment, but if you refuse the grace yo
u force the hand of God to judgment.  This is the day of grace because there lives before the face of 
God One of whom it says in scripture, “He is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours alone, but also for the whole world”.  It is open to all - God's attitude of grace is toward all men, and the only thing that will keep yo
u out will be this, that you do not acknowledge your liability.  There must be the acknowledgment of liability before there can be the relief.  You must acknowledge it, this is all that God asks you to do.  Without palliation or excuse, go right down to it.

  I am liable to God and I cannot pay.  No tears, nor prayers, none of these things can make atonement; the only thing that can make atonement is the precious blood of Christ.  “When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both”.  

  That is God's attitude towards them both, whether the five hundred pence debtor or the fifty.  They were both alike, they could not meet their liability.  What is to be done now?  Own the liability - mean it.  “When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both.  Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most?”

  I do not know which is the greatest point in the passage, but there are two grand points: God's attitude of grace towards all men and the way in which Christ endears Himself to those who know the grace that is in Him; and let me tell you, that is the way to love Christ, much forgiveness, much love.
  He justifies His child, He draws a striking contrast between His child and Simon.  He dismisses Simon.  As long as he keeps in that environment the situation will be on a plane as far as he is concerned.  It is open to both  open to all - but you must recognise your liability.  It is wisdom to own your liability and also to own that you cannot meet it yourself, and then you will learn how blessedly He has met it through His precious blood, which is the witness of the righteousness of God.  He dismisses Simon and turns to His child.

  Now sad and weary heart, you know you are not right with God, you are afraid of Him.  You cannot meet Him on the ground of your responsibility, you are away from Him, you want to come under the blessedness of His grace, I am sure.  Just look, He turns to His child, and His words have the same deep and blessed meaning to-night to all such.  He turns even to you and looks on you with divine love.

  May you know it as you sit there in the sense of your sinfulness and the weariness of your soul.  You can trust in Christ, can come to Him by faith, His words are for you as they were for her, for she represents the whole company of Wisdom's children.  “Thy sins are forgiven...  Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace”.  

  The Spirit of God is here to make good those words; the mighty power of the Spirit is here to make good those blessed words which fell from His lips, of which you have the record; they have their own true, deep, personal meaning for you now - mark it well.  “ Thy sins are forgiven...  Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace”.  

  I was preaching some years ago in Essex in a little hamlet - well I remember it.  It was in a little cottage; I stood in the passage and on either side was a room full of listeners.  On my right hand there was a middle-aged woman, and during the preaching she wept; she was greatly affected by the preaching.  I said to her afterwards, 
‘What is it; why do you sorrow so?’
  ‘Oh’, she said, ‘I do not know whether I have been sorry enough’.  She was making her sorrow her saviour - her repentance.  I said to her, 
‘He had the sorrow, the Lord Jesus; the Saviour had the sorrow when He was the sin-bearer’.  I had to leave the town and had no opportunity to say more to her.

  On the next Thursday I was lodged in a farmhouse at another village, and after breakfast the Lord said to me, ‘You go to that village’.  I cannot explain it, I would like to know it better, but He said, 
‘You go to that village’, and to that village I went.  The first house I came to - though I did not know it - was the house where that woman lived.

  A young woman opened the door in answer to my knock, and when she saw me she burst into tears and said, ‘Have you heard about mother?’.  I said, 
‘No, what has happened?’.  She said, 
‘Mother was sitting at breakfast when she fell off her chair and was paralysed down one side’.  Thank God, her tongue was not paralysed.
  
When she fell on the floor she cried, ‘Lord, send the preacher to me with words’.  The daughter added, 
‘We have sent for the doctor and we were going to send for you, but you have come’.  

  The Lord had sent me.  She said, 
‘She is lying on the bed and must hear your voice, so go up and see her’.  As I went up those stairs - I did 
not go very quickly - I said, ‘Lord, give me words for this dear soul’.  As I stepped into the bedroom a pair of anxious eyes looked at me and she said, 
‘Have you words for me?’
  I stood there and said, ‘The Lord Jesus, the precious Saviour, who died and rose again, if you will but trust Him, His words to you are, “Woman, thy sins are forgiven ...  Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace”
’.  I said no more and stood quite still.  She turned away from me - how gladly I saw it  she turned her head away and I heard her say adoringly and gratefully, 
‘I thank Thee, Lord, beautiful words, Lord, and I do thank Thee’.  

  Let them be beautiful words to you, and let your heart thank Him, poor, weary soul, as you are sitting there in the sense of your need, and look up into His face and say, Lord, here I am, Thou knowest all about me.  He will speak to you by the Spirit these words - again I repeat, for so much depends upon it.  His words are as efficacious for you to-night as for that woman – “Thy sins are forgiven....Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace”.  May God grant it.

  Are you cavilling at what I am saying?  Dare any of you say that this cannot be known until some future day?
  
How dare you say so?  God says, “Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.  Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile”.  (Ps 32: 1, 2) Do you think that God would tantalise us in presenting impossibilities to us?  

  Never mind theology; never mind what men say, there is a description by God Himself.  “Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven ...  unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile”.  That is God's description of a happy man.

  Unattainable, you say?  How dare you say so?  Not to be known.  How dare you say so in the presence of the word of God?  This momentous thing - and how momentous it is - our individual relationship with God.  Meet that woman outside Simon's House  many a time have I put the question to her in my mind, Are your sins forgiven?  Oh, yes, she would say.  Have you got peace, what is the ground of it?
  
He said so.  That is it.  He said so.  Never mind what Simon said or anybody else.  
He said it.  What did He say?
  
“Woman, thy sins are forgiven ... Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace”.  

  Now that is the first introduction to Christ, and that is the way in which Christ endears Himself to us.  That is what I call the first step in the apprehension of the grace of God.  It is forgiveness.

  I will proceed now and read further on in Luke 10:  33-37.  Here we have a deeper thing, a further apprehension - the riches of His grace.  We have had before us the grace of God in forgiveness, here we have this poor wretched man lying there.  It is not a question of sins, but of condition.  We are introduced to the story by the man who was not Wisdom's child asking the Lord, “What shall I do to inherit eternal life? ” and the Lord said, “What is written in the law?  how readest thou? ” He said, This is the way I read it, “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind
; and thy neighbour as thyself”.  

  Jesus said, “Go, and do thou likewise”.  
You go and do it, and you shall live.  The blessing does not lie in the reading but in the doing it.  Now if he had been upright and one of Wisdom's children he would have said, 
‘I cannot do it, I cannot love my neighbour as myself’.  
A man said to me at St. Ives, when I was preaching there, ‘Your coming here has turned me upside down and inside out.  I thought I had to love God, but now I find that I cannot
’.  A very good thing that, you are on the way to learning that God loves you.

  Here we have in this picture - I cannot go into details - a wretched man lying there on the roadside, naked and half dead.  Mark the salient points.  He was wounded by the deadly wound of self-love.  You do not love God or your neighbour.  We love ourselves too well, and the deadly wound of self-love is there.

  The good Samaritan came down from where love was to where love was not and He brought it down.  He brought love here - self-sacrificing love.  The good Samaritan was Jesus, who brought love down to the spot where love was not.  All our misery lies in self-love.  Have you not been bitten by that deadly wound of self-love?  

  How does it work?  
‘They do not think as much of me as they should’.  Would you not like to get clear of it?  I was down in Wiltshire during the late war, and met an old man there.  He was deploring the war as we all had to do, and I said to him, 
‘If everybody commenced to love God with all their heart and their neighbours as themselves, the war would end at once’.  We want to see the moral reason of things.  How could there be a war if man loved God with all his heart and his neighbour as himself?  

  I pity the politicians - I pray for them every day - but I pity them.  They think by altering people's circumstances they will make people happier - never one bit.
  
What is needed is the alteration in you.  That is it.  I often think of it and pity them - I do not say it disrespectfully, but I think of authorities when I am on the beach and see the children putting up their castles, and by-and-by the rude waves come up and wash them away.

  The government must be carried on, but people are not happier, they are growing more unhappy.  What is the meaning of it?  They want to be changed inside, not their circumstances outside.  You want the mighty love of God to be in your heart, that will make a difference, and then you love God and love your neighbour.  So will it be byand-by.  I thank God from the bottom of my heart.
  
I do not know where I should have been during the late war if I had not known that there is a time coming when from pole to pole every one will love God and his neighbour as himself; one great amen from pole to pole; God's will be done.
  When your heart is in the love of God your will is silenced, it is God's will.  From pole to pole amen shall be uttered, and there shall be great peace.  One amen-one will.  I will tell you why.  Because the one love will produce the one will.

  I must proceed very rapidly.  
One thing I should like to say, and if I speak of it naturally you will understand.  My beloved mother, when I was a poor little weakling in the cradle, morning, noon and night she was there; week after week, month after month, she was by my side.  What made her do it?  She couldn't help herself.  She loved me into loving her back again.  She has gone to be with Christ long since, but if she stood outside the door to-night and called my name I should know her voice from any other.  She put love into my heart, she loved me into loving her back again.  God loves us into loving Him back again.  My friend down at St. Ives, I have since learned, has been brought into the blessing of knowing that God loves him.

  Now He poured in the oil and the wine.  The deadly wound of self-love was there, but He poured in the oil and the wine.  He poured in the love of God.  “The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us”.  I cannot help loving God any more than I can 
help breathing.  How so?  He has shed abroad that love in my heart by the Holy Ghost.  That is the riches of His grace.

  My last point is the prodigal.  There we get the full glory of His grace, 
mark it well; we reach the climax of grace in Luke.  There was departure; there was distance; oh, what distance!  He took all that he had from his father and went off into a far country.  Departure and distance.  There he had destitution - he was hungry.  There he had degradation - he fed on the husks that the swine did eat.  He was sent into the fields to take care of swine - degradation.  Departure, distance - what a distance, a great way off.  What destitution - hungry.  What degradation - sent into the fields to feed swine.

  He had gone from a place where all was give and no take, and he got into a place where all was take and no give - a sad place.  That is the world, take everything from you and give you nothing, and he had gone away from where all was give and no take.  He thought of his father's house, all the plenty of it, never a tramp turned away with nothing; he thought of that and the goodness of his father brought him to repentance.  So he repented and he resolved: “I will arise and go to my father”.  He would return to the goodness of his father.

  I want you all to take this in.  Here is a dark background, but there shines resplendent over against the dark background of the poor prodigal the glory of God's grace - the glory of it.  If the boy was hungry for his father and his father's house - let it touch your heart  the father's house was hungry for the boy.  That is God, dear friends.  Now, the boy was hungry, but the father was looking out for him.  God is like that.  Jesus came to deliver us.  “When he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and ran”.  The hunger of the father's heart - God is like that, may it touch your heart - he was on the outlook for that poor degraded boy.  He says, 
‘I will let him know the kind of father he has turned his back on’.  He ran and fell on his neck and kissed him.
  
That is God.  God is like that.  He fell on his neck and covered him with kisses.  That is the reception.  There was the repentance, the resolve, the return, and the reception.  That is God.

  There arose from his contrite heart doubly contrite now because of the father's welcome - there arose from his heart and his lips, “Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son”.  He stops.  He had meant to say, “Make me as one of thy 
hired servants”.  But he cannot say it now.  His father
’s kisses checked it.  What does he say?  Do just what you like with me.  I begin to see you are going to bless me, not according to my need, but according to what you are yourself.  What a grand thought that is.  Look: “Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him”.
  
He was robed; he was ringed; he was regaled, and then he rejoiced.
  Oh, how pregnant are those words; how full of meaning - there are twenty discourses in each.  He robed him; he ringed him; he regaled him; and he rejoiced over him, made suitable for himself.
  
That is it.  
‘I will have you near me so that I can look upon you with pleasure’.  That is the story of the glory of His grace.  “And they began to be merry”.
  
“They began to be merry”.  
Did it ever end?  No, never; it never ended.  Do you say, 
‘I want to get away from my mother's house so that I can see life’?  What folly!  That is a way that leads to nothing but death.

  My dear mother looked through her tears at me and said, ‘I will never let you go’.  
And her prayers were answered when I was eighteen.  I came to Christ, and I never knew happiness till I came to Christ.  “They began to be merry” - they 
began.
  Look at me; do you think I am unhappy? do you think that what I am speaking about makes me unhappy?  If I could only put the one hundredth part of the music of it in your heart that is in my heart through grace, I would do it.

  When I was in Indianapolis a conductor on a car said to me, ‘Do you belong to the happy band?’ I said, ‘No; I belong, thank God, to the pleasures for evermore people’.  Would you not like to be a Christian, I ask you?  Would you not like to have the music in your heart?  Let me tell you, my dear young people, I yearn over you, that in all my earthly joys  and I have had a good many - I have always had the sense that some day I should lose it.  That is the point, it will come to an end.  But in this spiritual joy that has come to my heart I know I shall never lose it.

  What a magnificent thing it is to be a Christian.  It is open to you all.  The very first step in it is that you go as the woman did to taste it in forgiveness, and then to have Christ endear Himself to your heart, and then you will learn the riches of His grace and the glory of His grace in deepening joy.  God grant it.  Amen.

_____________________
  

 GOD IS, AND GOD WILL PREVAIL
  Proverbs 30: 1-6
  This remarkable book closes with the two chapters which give the force and meaning of chapter 1:  8.  That is to say, chapter 
1: 8 covers the last two chapters of this wonderful book.  It reads thus: “My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother”.  The instruction of the father is in chapter 
30, and the law of the mother in chapter 31.
  You will remember that I am here to preach the gospel, not to give an exposition of scripture, but I merely say that and pass on to the passage before us: “The words of Agur the son of Jakeh”.  The Hebrew meaning of the word Agur is Gatherer, and of Jakeh is Instructor.  He is in the presence of Ithiel and Ucal, in which lies all that I have to say.  These two Hebrew names mean this: “God is,” and “God will prevail”.  That is the meaning of these two Hebrew names, “Ithiel,” God is, and “Ucal,” God will prevail.  That is the key to the position - the key to all I have to say.  God is.  He is and He will prevail.

  Scripture says, “The fool hath said in his heart, … no God”.  It does not mean that such an one does not believe in the existence of a supreme Being, but the force of it is, 
‘No God for me’.  What it means is the exclusion of God, and there are millions of people who believe in the existence of a supreme Being, the Almighty God, and yet they constantly say and have said by their ways all their lifetime, 
‘No God for me’.  

  Now, beloved friends, I pause before such a thing as that.  It is the greatest possible folly to exclude God.  The exclusion of God will end in eternal ruin.  You cannot afford to exclude God.  If I speak of religion, and there is to-day plenty of religion, my definition of it is this, that it is the respectful recognition of God at a distance on occasions.  People make a respectful recognition of God at a distance on occasions, but there is nothing in that.  It is not Christianity.

  Christianity is this, that God has come into my life to beautify it, and to make me supremely happy down here in this world in the blessed knowledge of Himself.  That is the nature of the proposal in the gospel.  The blessed God desires that we should know Him, and know Him in such a way that our happiness shall not depend upon our circumstances 
here.  The nature of the proposal is to make us supremely happy in the knowledge of God here and now.  That was the nature of the proposal in the early days of the gospel.  There was not one word said by any of the preachers in the early days of the gospel that if they believed the gospel they would go to heaven, not a word about it.

  You may study it and look closely into the inspired record of the early proclamation of the gospel, and you will find that none of the preachers ever said that if they believed the gospel they would go to heaven.  What was the nature of the proposal in the proclamation of the gospel?  The nature of the proposal was this, that people should have the forgiveness of sins and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and in the gift of the Holy Ghost there shall be the knowledge of God, and His blessed love shall be shed abroad in our hearts.

  What a magnificent thought that is.  Do you think that God would tantalise us with magnificent impossibilities?
  
No.  
There is no such thing.  God proposes to every one to make you supremely happy in the knowledge of Himself down here in this world.  After the early Christians were thus blessed with the gospel and had received the Holy Ghost they were taught that they were going to heaven, and they were taught it because love wanted them there.  That is how it comes out.
  
I impress this point on you, that you cannot afford to exclude God from your life.
  There was a time - I speak as a Christian  when I tried to exclude Him, but now I am never happier than when I think of God.  I have known Him for fifty-three years; He has come into my life and beautified my life and made me supremely happy, and that happiness does not depend upon whether I have a fine coat or a shabby one; a long purse or a short purse; whether I live in a palace or a cottage; my happiness does not lie in these things, but in the knowledge of God.

  Now then, the fool hath said in his heart, ‘No God for me’.  
The Lord tells us in Luke 12  - I draw a contrast now - of a man who had a piece of land.  Who gave it him?  God gave it to him.  He had the strength and the ability to cultivate that piece of land.
  
God gave the ability.  He had the sunshine and the rain.  God gave it him.  He was very diligent and he expanded it - men love to expand, because it gives them a place in the eyes of their fellow creatures, poor things that we are; he prospered and said, “What shall I do? ” “
thou hast much goods laid up for many years”.  “This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there 
will I bestow all my fruits and my goods”.  That is expansion.  Now there was not one thought of God or of his neighbour.  That man's life was self-centred and God was excluded, and not only God, but his neighbour.

  What an awful life to live, to be self-centred, to shut out God, and if you shut out God you shut out your neighbour.  That was the condition of that man.  The neighbours said, 
‘Well done’, the newspapers would say, ‘Well done’, but God says, “Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee”.  In one fell moment he went from time into eternity, and while I am speaking that kind of thing is still going on, and that should make us very serious.

  Have you excluded God from your life?  If you exclude God from your life here, He will exclude you from His life there.  Awful exclusion to be without God for ever and ever.  The very fact that such is the danger that some of my hearers are in fills me with anxiety, and I long after your souls, for this man used the goodness of God to exclude God.

  I will draw you another picture from this precious Gospel of Luke with which you are more or less familiar.  The evangelist puts it so graphically that you can see it livingly before you.  There is a man in Luke's gospel standing in a boat in the water.  He is a fisherman and pursuing his avocation, and the circumstances are that they have been out all night and have taken nothing.
  
If you do not take anything, you have to wash your nets in the morning anyhow.  He is there washing his nets.

  Yonder on the beach a great crowd is gathering and in the foreground of that crowd is Jesus, the blessed Son of God, and they are crowding down to hear the gracious words that proceed out of His mouth.  Who is this Jesus?  

  He it was who spake and it was done; commanded and it stood fast.  He it was who spangled the heavens and upheld them with the word of His power.  It was Jesus, and He is here - let it touch your hearts - the blessed God has come down to man to win the confidence of His poor degraded creatures.  Do you know that this degradation as God sees it lies in distrust of Him, all the rest is detail.  Jesus is there, the blessed Son of God, and they press down to hear the words which fall from His lips, and He draws near to this man.  The first meeting of these two is found in John's gospel, they are known to each other, but this was going to be a wonderful day in the history of Peter.

  Jesus says, ‘Let me preach from your boat’.  The people are crowding down on the beach
  you see them there-and Peter is there listening.  I think I can see him there listening to Jesus, the blessed Saviour.  Have you listened to Jesus?  He will make you forget everything and everybody but Himself.  Have you listened to Him like that?  Peter is listening and he forgets his nets.  So may it be with you; you have heard about Him, you may have been taught to lisp His name from early childhood, but I do ask you with great anxiety, does He stand out before your consciousness in the reality of what He is?  Have you heard His voice?  Has He spoken to you?  Is there a living link between your soul and this Jesus, the blessed Son of God?  God grant that to-night there may be a link with Him, that you may listen to Him and that you may hear His voice and be conscious of a living link between your soul and Himself.

  When the preaching was over and the audience dismissed, the Lord turned to Peter and said, ‘Launch out into the deep, and I will give you a draught’.  

  Peter said to the Lord, “We have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word”.  “At thy word”.
  
That proves the value of the listening; as Peter was listening his heart said, ‘I can trust you’.  So shall it be.  That is the point, the blessed God was there in Peter's boat and He won his confidence.  Has He won yours?  “Nevertheless at thy word,” Peter said, and he let down the net, and then He who created the fish commanded them and filled Peter's net with fish.  Creatorial power and goodness were shining there.  The nets are full of fish, the threads are breaking and the boats are filled with that living freight; but the draught of fish drew Peter's soul into the presence of God.  “ Ithiel,” God is.

  Let me tell you, dear friends, that is conversion.  If God be for me at any given moment it must raise the question as to what I am to Him.  Let me tell you that conversion is intensely individual.  We are not converted in a company; but one by one we come to Christ.  We must come to Him; we must have the sense in our souls that He has received us, that we have heard His blessed voice.  Here is the point, you know very well  I speak as a man - what it is to have the feeling of success in your veins when you have done a good stroke of business, when you have had a good catch of fish or whatever it may be.  What is Peter thinking of?  The commercial value of that catch?  No.  He never had a catch like that before.  But what 
is happening in that man's soul is this, he is drawn into the divine presence.
  You might have said to Peter, ‘You had better wait till you see the Lord alone, James and John are seeing you and listening’.  It does not matter about James and John when God is there, we are delivered from all such feelings when God is there.  God and you, and you and God, and no intrusion of a third person.  That is conversion - in the blessed solitude with God to learn what you are and to learn what God is.

  He turns his back on his companions and on his fish, and he falls down at Jesus' feet.  Well I know it through grace, I know the action of it.  “ Depart from me for I am a sinful man, O Lord”.  “You have filled my nets with fish that I might learn that I am full of sin, that I am a man full of sin.  But if you go what shall I do? ” He tells Him to go but clings to Him.
  
What is it?  
Why just this  “Ithiel,” God is.  “Ucal”
, God will prevail.  In the day of grace He will prevail, but if He prevails not with you in the day of grace He will prevail with you in the day of judgment.  Surely it is most blessed to meet Him now in the day of His grace.

  The Lord looks upon Peter and says, If you are full of sin I am full of grace, and My grace is greater than your sin.  That is it, “Ithiel” and “Ucal”.  

  You see, on the one hand, the rich fool excluding God.  Creatorial power and goodness only served to make him selfish and he left God out, but he died that same night.  Here in our other passage creatorial power and goodness only drew this man into the light of the presence of God to learn that he was full of sin and to learn that God is full of grace, and His grace is greater than sin.  How blessed it is; does it touch your heart?  I never tire of the story, the more I speak from it the more I enjoy and love it.  That is what is so lovely in God's word, the more you read it the more you love it and the more blessed it is, you never tire of it.

  Surely we who are the subjects of God's grace are growing as Christians in the sense of the grace that has met us.  Do I forget the first touch, my first meeting with Christ?  How can I forget it?  It is growingly beautiful to me.  I do not lose the sense of it, but there is a growing apprehension of the grace that met me.

  I have said all this that you may see the force of these words, the divine meaning of these words “Ithiel” and “Ucal”.  “Ithiel”
, God is, and “Ucal”, God will prevail.  No matter what evil you may find in yourself, yon will find that the good that is in God is greater than the evil in yourself, and if I have to learn - and I must learn - the evil in myself, it is to find God -blessed finding.
  
If I have to go down through the mire, and it is very painful, I have to go down and find what I am, and I find God underneath it, and the goodness in God is greater than the evil in me.  He never condones evil, but He has taken advantage of the evil to shew what the good is in Himself.

  I am saying this that your heart may be led to trust Him, that the presentation of Him may win your confidence and you may be found among those of whom it may be said, “Every word of God is pure; He is a shield unto them that put their trust in him”.  He was a shield for me and He will be a shield for you.

  Now this scripture is very fascinating and I will proceed to shew you the force of verse 4.  I call special attention to it.  Did you catch the thought
?  I
  trust that God may impress it upon you - that if God raises a question in your soul - He always does when His presence is there - if God be for you at any moment it must raise the question of what you are to God.  It must necessarily do so.  God raises such a question in your soul to introduce His own blessed answer.  You cannot answer it, but God can answer it, and God's answer to every possible question is Christ.

  What a magnificent thought.  How my heart is thrilled with such a thing as that.  He raises a question with me as to what I am, and He raises the question to introduce the answer, and His answer is Christ.  Many of you here are Christians.  Is there one answer to all your tears, all your desires, all your prayers?  He has got one answer and that is Christ.  If you are passing through bereavement and sorrow and the heart feels it - God intends you to feel it - it is to find Christ.  Blessed compensation.  If I have been through deep sorrow and have found Christ, what blessed compensation.  I have found that He is more than enough to fill every breach.  Do you think I could
, by searching with my brain, find out Christ?  
Every bit of appreciation of Christ has been through a sense of need.  It is an experimental thing, not a doctrinal thing.  There is no such thing as a mere doctrinal knowledge of Christ.  No.  I beg your attention to it; every bit of apprehension you may have of Christ, you have been led into the knowledge of and the blessedness of experimentally.

  But to return, I called attention to verse 4 of our chapter.  To analyse it as one would like to do in detail would take longer than the time at my disposal.  It is most vast.  There are five questions raised in verse 4, and these five questions are answered by Christ.

  I could not speak on it if I had not the light of the New Testament scripture.  The first question is, “Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended?” It appals you.  “Who hath ascended?” That is not a geographical question, behind it is a moral question.  Who has measured the distance between a holy God and an unholy sinner?  Who has measured it?  

  Let me tell you, dear friends, that one of the sweetest thoughts - and there are many sweet thoughts in the gospel - but one of the sweetest is this, that God felt the distance at which His poor creatures were.  He felt it.  God cannot bear distance.  He loves nearness.  He cannot bear silence, and silence is the result of distance.  If you are in distance you are silent towards Him; but God sent His own Son to remove the distance and to break the silence; the blessed God.  You remember that when the prodigal “was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and ran”.  If the boy was hungry, and he was, the father's heart was hungry for the boy.  That is God.  He felt the distance.  There were painful results to the poor prodigal; there was departure, distance, destitution, and degradation, but the father felt it.

  Is God like that?  He is.  He felt the distance in which His poor creature was, so He sent His own Son to remove the distance.  How?  How could He remove the distance?  By going into the distant place.  Where was the distance removed?  In the cross.
  
Have you heard that bitter cry, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” wrung from His blessed lips and from His heart?  Who could measure what it was for Jesus to be out in the distance?  In dark Gethsemane angels were sent to strengthen Him, but when He was there no angelic being could cross that dark abyss; He was left alone.  Come and learn His love, and learn to hate the sin that put Him there, by that bitter cry, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
” 
  The distance was removed by the blessed Son of God being in the distance.  
It is a moral idea.  
He removed the distance; and He who measured the distance measures the nearness.
     So near, so very near to God, 
     Nearer I could not be,
     For in the Person of His Son, 
I am as near as He.  

  He felt the distance.  One could spend a whole evening on that one thought.  I am presenting Christ to you according to that which He has wrought.

  The second question is, “Who hath gathered the wind in his fists?”  Who is greater than Satan?  Satan is a powerful being, the prince of the power of the air.  Satan is behind all those things that we are subject to.  He can blow with his winds and raise the mighty fury of the will of man; but the One who opposed Satan, the Son of God, is greater than Satan; He has been down into Satan's dark domain and He has broken his power.  He is greater than Satan.
  
Who is?  
Jesus, the Son of God.  He has won the victory.  He has gone down into Satan's headquarters and broken them up.

  What a wonderful Saviour He is.  
How we should trust Him.  I sometimes feel that I cannot stand against Satan's winds.  I am a poor creature, however can I stand against Satan?  But I can get behind the One who has gathered the wind in His fists and I feel perfectly safe there.
  
“Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death ... and deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage”.  What a mighty victory He won over Satan.

  Question number three.  “Who has put 
bound the waters in a garment?” In other words, ‘Who has annulled death?’  He is greater than death.  Who?  Jesus.  How He looms before my delighted heart in the grandeur of what He is.  He has annulled death and He has brought to light life and incorruptibility through the gospel.  When you came into the world - every one of you - death said of you as children of Adam, 
‘I will pull you down; I will feed on you’.  Dare you deny it?  You cannot.  Of every child of Adam death could say, 
‘I will pull you down and I will feed on you’.  It cannot be denied.

  One of the greatest statesmen of the last century was dying; a Christian doctor stood by his side and held his hand, and he said, ‘O doctor, I am overwhelmed’.  Death was overwhelming him.  Death was over him.  
Gone were all his honours and all his glories.  Oh, how pitiful it is.  That is what brought me to Christ, the thought that I must die.  My heart was beating high with ambition, I wanted to get on in this world, and I was urged to do so by some who knew me.  But I was the subject of a mother's prayers  she looked through her tears at me when I left home and said, 
‘I will never leave off going to God for you’.  

  When I went away - poor silly fellow that I was - I thought to see life, to have a fine time, to have sea liberty.  It was absolute slavery - my mother kept praying for me.  I have sat in a concert hall and heard sweet music and I have felt the touch of my mother's hand and heard her pleading voice.  She was spoiling all my pleasure by her prayers.

  The thought was on my spirit that I must die, and I wanted something to love outside the reach of death.  
Like the child who said to its mother, ‘Give me something to love that cannot die’.  Pet after pet had died, and the child wanted something to love that would not die, but the mother could not do it.  The Lord looked in pity on me - His compassions are very great.  I well remember it, I was a sailor lad and sitting up in one of the largest churches in Glasgow, right away from home, and I sat up there in the gallery.  There were probably three thousand in the place, and the preacher got up and said, 
‘I take for my text the first chapter of Colossians and the nineteenth verse.  “In him all the fulness 
… was pleased to dwell”.  

  What kind of a sermon was it?  I do not know, but I know what happened to me.  This glorious Person, my precious Saviour, drew me out, He looked into the depths of my sad and weary heart and said, 
‘I am for you, and you are for Me’.  I said, 
‘A poor sinful creature like me?’ ‘I am for you, and you are for Me’, and we two came together, never to be severed, never.
  Many a time I have thought of it; it is fifty-three years ago, but it comes sweetly to me over again.  
‘I am for you, and you are for Me’.  Never to be severed.  My heart was wakened to a new affection and I have found what my heart desired, some One to love outside the region of death, and I have got it.  I have known hours of sorrow and bereavement and have had to look through my tears into His face and say, 
‘I shall never lose Thee’.  He is outside the region of death.

  What a magnificent thing it is to be a Christian.  He has annulled death.
  
What is the good of my preaching to you if I do not say it to myself?  I can say to death, 
‘You will never pull me down and you will never feed on me now.  
I know the One who has said, “Whoso eateth my flesh ... hath eternal life”.  He has the keys of death.  
‘Thou art my servant, O death’.  That is it.  That is Christianity.  How could I say it but for Jesus, who died and went down into death to annul it.

  Question number four is this, “Who hath established all the ends of the earth? ” Take the last few years, where have people been?  Governments breaking up, everything giving way.  Many a time have I said during the last five years, I have received 
“a kingdom which cannot be moved”.  Everything for Christians is established on the resurrection platform in Christ.  Established there.
  
We preach a risen Christ to you.
  That glorious resurrection morn 
  Bids doubts for ever cease,
  For far and wide the news is borne, 
  Of perfect peace.  

  I was preaching at Newport (Mon.) some years ago, and I said to the people in giving out that hymn, ‘We Christians keep Easter all the year round; not only once a year, but all the year round’.  He cherishes the fact that he knows a risen Christ.  Everything is established there.

  I should like to refer to it.  I was travelling a few years afterwards in Somersetshire.  I had been to a meeting and had to get out at the junction.  It was a very dark night, but I heard a voice saying, 
‘Mr Johnson’.  I groped my way along the platform and said, 
‘Who are you?’ There I saw the engine driver who had driven the train I had come in by, and he said, ‘You don't know me, but, thank God, I know you, and I thought I would tell you about it.  Do you remember telling us in Newport that you kept Easter all the year round?
’ I said, ‘Yes, I think I do’.  
‘Well’, he said, ‘I have been keeping Easter all the year round ever since’.  
That is it.  A risen Christ is presented to you.  All is established in a risen Christ and on an unshakable foundation.

  Now the last and best of all, question five.  “What is his name, and what is his Son's name, if thou canst tell? ”

  Can you tell me what His name is?  Who can tell what His Son's name is?
  
We Christians can.  
“We have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world”.  That is His name and that is His Son's name.  We can tell.  All we Christians here can join with the preacher and say, “We have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world”.  Is He your Saviour?
  
Your own personal Saviour?  God grant it may be so.

  I have endeavoured to shew you what is here in God is, that as you sit there listening your heart has been saying, ‘He is worthy of my trust, worthy of my confidence’.  You are never saved by creed, but by personal faith in Christ.
  
I trust that all of you here, if you have never been conscious of a personal faith and contact with Christ, may know what it is now to have a personal sense of your need.  He is worthy to be trusted.  I have known Him for fifty-three years.  I have summered with Him and wintered with Him; I have not been all that I should like to have been, and I cannot take pleasure in what I have been, but I take the greatest possible pleasure in what He has been.  May He be all this to you for His name's sake.  Amen.

_____________________
THE PURPOSE OF GOD TO MAKE MY LIFE BEAUTIFUL
Mark 5: 15
“And they come to Jesus, and see him that was possessed with the devil, and had the legion, sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind: and they were afraid.” 
  Does it strike you, beloved friends, that the ending of this verse is very singular?  “And they were afraid”.  The people were afraid when they saw this.  Why were they afraid? what was there to cause them to fear?  We are not told that they were afraid in the former part of the chapter where we have the past condition of this man presented so graphically.  There he was under this awful domination; living there in the place of death, crying night and day; poor, restless creature under this frightful domination.

  They had sought to reform him, to restrain him; they had bound him with fetters reformation fetters - but the devil was too strong for reformation fetters, he had broken the bands asunder and they could do nothing for him.
  They had known him under those distressing circumstances, but now they saw the man under a new domination, and in a new condition entirely.  He was sitting - no longer restless, but sitting - he was at rest.  No longer naked, he was clothed, and his brain was no longer railing as it had been all those years, but he was in his right mind.  That is what they saw; they saw the man sitting in absolute rest, he was clothed and in his right mind.  They saw it and they were afraid.

  They were not afraid of the man under the past conditions, but now they see him thus they are afraid.  I call your attention to this and then dismiss it.  What were they afraid of?  The fact is, men are more familiar with the power of Satan than they are with the power of God, far more familiar; they are more at home with the power of Satan in destruction than they are with the power of God in blessing.  You will find that is so.

  There is one passage in Psalm 14 I wish to call attention to - there are other passages, too, which I could quote - but it says, “There were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the righteous”.  They were in fear.  And so here, here is a man who has been delivered from the power of darkness and translated into the kingdom of the Son of God's love.  
That is what this verse sets forth - it is a beautiful miniature picture of the kingdom of God.  He is delivered from Satan's kingdom and has got into God's kingdom, and when you are there you have absolute rest in the kingdom of God.

  Jesus was his Lord; he had come under a new domination; he was delivered from the power of Satan and had come into God's kingdom where Jesus was now his Lord, and he was under the subduing influence of the Lord Jesus Christ.  
That is a Christian.  Are you one of those?  Have you known the subduing power of the Lord Jesus Christ?  Do you know what it is to be delivered from the power of Satan, from the kingdom of Satan, and brought into the kingdom of the Son of God's love?  That is what this passage sets forth most blessedly.

  In the previous chapter we find the parable of the sower sowing the seed; the seed was sown and the seed is the word of God - the revelation of God.  If that is sown in man's heart he begins to know God.  Now in this chapter we have the deliverance of the Son of God.  There must be deliverance in order to enjoy the sowing - that is to say, the narratives given here set forth the true condition of man as he is, of man in the flesh.  Now as such they need deliverance, and the Deliverer is the blessed Son of God.  He is the Deliverer, He is the Son of God.

  There is a verse of our chapter which I must call attention to - the first verse - it is a geographical verse; the Lord went through the sea and passed over.  
I quite admit that is a geographical statement, but underlying that is the key of the whole of the chapter.  This is what I refer to.  The Lord has been through the sea of death and has reached the other side.  There is no other Christ to preach to you than a risen Christ.  I repeat it, a risen Christ.

  In the early days of the Acts, if you have looked at it, when they preached the gospel  Peter or Paul, for instance, or whoever it was - the culminating point was a risen Christ.  He has been through the sea and has reached the other side, or there would be no Saviour for us.  He has reached the other side and is victorious over death.  He is a mighty Victor, the Son of God.

  In Romans He is declared to be the Son of God by resurrection from among the dead.  Who He is is declared by resurrection.  He was declared when He was here in the spirit of holiness, and in the exposition of the 
gospel in the Romans He is declared to be the Son of God by resurrection from among the dead.  He has reached the other side.  What a glorious Person He is.  He has reached the other side; He has won the victory; been through the sea; made atonement.  As I was trying to shew you last week, He has broken Satan's power and everything that is against us He has met.

  You remember the story of Jonah: well, a lady said to me some years ago, as I was travelling with her and speaking about Jonah.  
‘Mr Johnson, surely you do not believe in the story of Jonah, I thought that was exploded years ago’.  My reply was, 
‘Madam, I believe in God’.  If you believe in God you must believe Jonah.

  Dear friends, if you do not believe the story of Jonah you have lost Jesus, and there is no Saviour for you, for the blessed Saviour said, “As Jonah was”.  Was He mistaken?  Can you imagine it?  Can you entertain such a thought?  Do you remember what fell from His lips, “As Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale's belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth”.  Do you not see that if you do not believe the story of Jonah you have lost Jesus and there is no Saviour.  I could not believe in a Saviour who was mistaken, who was fallible.  You remember the story: Jonah was on the deck of the ship fleeing from the presence of God.  He was not a type of the Lord Jesus in that; he was God’s sent one, and in despondency embarked on that voyage with the heathen mariners.  A storm came up, the sea was white with foam, and the poor heathen mariners cried to their gods to deliver them.

  Jonah was asleep in the side of the ship.  They thought of their Jewish passenger and roused him from his sleep, saying, “Call upon 
thy God … that we perish not.”  And Jonah came on deck, and said, 
‘I know what this is for, it is on my account; the only way out of the difficulty is to throw me overboard; the storm will never cease until you do’.  

  Now sailors are very tender with their passengers - I was a sailor once myself, and I know - passengers always get the first chance.  
So they called upon their gods, but the ship was sinking; they threw overboard all the cargo and the tackling, and then at last they called up Jonah and threw him over.  He sank beneath the waves and there was a great calm.

  Time was when Jesus, the Son of God, stood on the deck of our sinking ship; His eye surveyed it, and His heart was filled with divine compassion - that blessed Jesus, the Son of God.  He surveyed it - it was white with foam - the wrath of God was deserved, righteously deserved - and He knew it, and He went beneath those waves and those billows.  “All thy waves and thy billows are gone over me”.
  
He was overwhelmed in that bitter hour.  Are you so familiar with the fact that it has no place in your heart?  Do you know the facts?  How are you affected by the fact that Jesus died, that Jesus went underneath the wrath of God?  He exhausted it; but He has reached the other side.  There is no other Christ to preach than a risen Christ and a glorified Christ.

  It is a momentous question.  
Where is Christ now?  This blessed Man, the Son of God, Maker of heaven and earth, yet very Man, where is He now?  Do you ever sit and think of that?
  
Where is He?  He is at the right hand of God.  He has been through the sea; He has reached the resurrection shore and now He is exalted at the right hand of God.
  
There He is.  Do you see Him there?  Do you see Jesus?  

  Beloved friends, these eyes have never seen Him; these fingers have never touched Him; these ears have never heard His voice; but He stands out before my soul in the living reality of what He is more than any living person on this earth.  Thank God.  He is the Son of God; He has been through the sea; He has reached the other side; He is declared to be the Son of God by resurrection from among the dead, and He moves through this chapter in mighty power.

  I love to think of Him moving through the chapter; for, remember, these gospels were written years after the death and resurrection and exaltation of Christ; the Spirit of God wrote the narratives of the gospels years after, and in view of where Christ is; in view of what He has done and where He is; so that when we read the gospels we have it livingly before us, and what He is in this chapter He is to-night.  He is as available to you now as He was here.  Remember the words of our Lord to Thomas, “Because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed”.

  So you go through the chapter, and it is a most fascinating chapter; I could preach from it all the year round; if I thought of myself as a preacher I might diversify, but that is not my point.  Something fresh and something original is what people are after, but we need the old, old story over and over again.

  Now there are three narratives in this chapter.  There is the man under the domination of sin - under Satan; there is the woman weakened and defiled by sin; and there is the little child of twelve years of age in the deadly grip of death.  Man under the domination of sin; the woman weakened and defiled by disease, which sets forth what sin is; and the little child in the deadly grip of death.  Can any of you dare to say that it is not here now?  Satan's power, the defilement of sin, and the power of death; they are here.  You will do well to take heed to it - to the conditions.  If the ruin is dire  and it is - the remedy is greater.

  You have the most graphic descriptions of diseases put through your letter-boxes in order to present a remedy, and so that you may apply at once for the remedy.  The description is all right, but the remedy is oftentimes very doubtful.

  The ruin is great here, but the remedy is greater.  How then are you going to appreciate the remedy unless you are made to feel the ruin?  I cannot make you feel it, but the Spirit of God can.  Here is this man under this frightful domination - held by Satan  he is the mouthpiece of Satan, and dwelling in the place of death and restless.  Are not people restless to-day?  Oh, yes, they are restless in heart and growing more restless as the years go by, living in excitement away from God.  Religious, perhaps, but I gave you my definition of religion the other night, the respectful recognition of God at a distance on certain occasions to appease the conscience.  There is nothing in that.  The respectful recognition of God at a distance on occasions is religion, but there is nothing in that.

  Christianity, as I understand it, is this, though I may be repeating myself - God proposes to come into my life to make my life beautiful.  That is it.  “Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom; 
neither let not the mighty man glory in his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me”.  The glory of a man lies in the knowledge of God.  I was never truly happy until I knew God.  I never knew what real happiness was until I knew God, and God has become my exceeding joy.

  There were moments in my history when I was glad to forget Him, to forget that I was responsible to Him, and I wanted my own way; I wanted to pursue my own way and I was glad to shut God out; but now through grace I am never happier than when I am thinking about God - never.  God has become my exceeding joy.  I am speaking also for other 
Christians of what is proper to a Christian, not simply of myself, but as a Christian, and I never knew happiness until I knew God, and He has become my exceeding joy for fifty-three years He has been my exceeding joy.
  Let me tell you, dear friends, I have known the value of these things in hours of peril.  My life has been very varied; I have been near to death.  I have been covered up for dead, and I have been on the Atlantic when we expected to go to the bottom at any moment; the waves were dashing over us, and I remember rolling myself up in my blanket, dead tired and hungry, for we had had no food for thirty-six hours, and saying to myself, 
‘I shall see the Lord directly’ and closing my eyes and sleeping as quietly as ever I slept in my mother’s house at home.  I remember saying, 
‘I shall see Jesus now’.  Not one bit of trepidation in my heart.  I have been taught the value of these things and can speak of them to you.

  When I was preaching at Basingstoke one day people were saying, ‘Who is this man who is preaching?’.  I said, 
‘I have not come to preach about myself, I have come to preach Christ, but my name is William Johnson; I was once a sailor and have been tossed up like Jonah to come and preach to you’.  The Lord said, Not yet, you are not to come yet.  

  So here this demoniac besought the Lord that he might be with Him, but the Lord said, No, you go home to your friends and tell them what great things the Lord has done for you.  I send you on a mission now; by-and-by you shall come and dwell with Me, but I send you on a mission now.

  What about the people here?  May I point out to you the two extremes - on the one hand there was a man raving like a maniac in opposition to Christ, the Son of God, and on the other hand you see the people preferring their pigs to Christ.  That is the devil.  They prayed Him to depart out of their coast.  What an awful thing.  On the one hand the raving maniac and on the other the deadly power of Satan.  They say, Go out of our coast, you are disturbing our commercial values, we have lost two thousand pigs through you; go away.

  What have you preferred to Christ?  It is an awful thing to slight Him.

  I remember a poor woman at Canterbury who seemed to be anxious about her soul, and I said I would go and see her.  On the Monday morning I called at her cottage; she knew I was knocking at her door, and 
she just opened it a little bit and said, ‘Mr Johnson I have thought it all over.  I know what you will tell me, to come to Christ; but if I do, I shall have my husband against me and my children against me, and I could not bear it
’, and she shut the door.  How awfully solemn.

  Here they preferred the man to be a wretched maniac, and they preferred their pigs to Christ.  They had lost their swine - the Lord had sent the devils into them and the whole herd ran down the hill and were drowned - they had lost their prosperity.

  If you want a Deliverer from Satan there is the Son of God.  You are no match for Satan.  What a folly it is - I have heard men singing, 
‘Britons never shall be slaves’, and they are slaves to the devil all the time they are singing about their liberty.
  Now I come to what I hope will be of blessing to many here.  There is a woman brought before us as the Lord is passing along - Jairus had begged the Lord to come because his child was sick - and as He went His way to Jairus's house He met this woman.  She had been twelve years in this sad condition.  The child was twelve years old and the woman had been twelve years in this dreadful condition.  She had spent all that she had, but instead of getting better she grew worse.  All these weary years of disappointment, trying to be good, trying to be better, but only growing worse and worse.  The more you try to be better, the more you find out the badness.  So at last she comes to the end of her resources.  
‘Man’s extremity is God's opportunity’ is a very good saying.
  She hears of Jesus; there is a great crowd passing through the street, and pressing through the crowd the woman comes to Him.  What brings you to Him is your need.  Jesus only commits Himself to your need, He never commits Himself to your brains.  He did not come here to be discussed.  No.  It says at the end of John 2, He 
“did not commit himself unto them, because he knew ... what was in man”.  
He will not commit Himself to anything but need.
  If you have any knowledge of Christ it is through the necessity of your soul.  You cannot understand Him by knowing Him mentally, it is through the conscience and the heart.  It is no use trying to argue people into Christianity; there must be the living power of it in the heart and the conscience.  This is an engaging story and I hope some will get help from this point.  She says, If I may touch but the hem of His garment.  She 
pushes her way through, her need makes her earnest.  She had been ill twelve years - think of it.  I think I can see her timidly going behind Him.  Her need was great and she put out her hand and touched the hem of His garment and she was made whole.  That is faith - the hand of need.  
‘Lord, I need Thee’.  She never said, 
‘I need Thee’.  She puts her hand out and touches Him, and He knows that touch.
  
He says, “Who touched me?”.  The disciples are astounded at such a thing.
  
A vast crowd and the Lord said, “Who touched me?”
  Supposing I am crossing by the Bank of England - the human tide is strong there  and I turn round and say, “Who touched me?” What would people say?  
‘All are touching you; a great crowd touching you, and you ask who touched you!’  But the Lord says, There is a touch I know.

  Have you given that touch?  May you do so to-night in the need of your soul.  He is here as much to-night as He was in this chapter.  As you sit there in the sense of your need, in the sense of the glory of this blessed Person and how He is adapted to your need, you may put out your hand and say, “Lord, I trust Thee”.  

  I see a vast crowd around Christ by way of creed, and creed never saved a man yet.  Never.  I see millions round Christ by way of creed, but that never saved a man yet; it is personal faith; and amongst the vast millions around Christ in Christendom by way of creed there are tens of thousands who have come to Him and have put out their hand and touched Him.
  
I often think of it, of the vast crowd around Christ by way of profession and creed, and among them are those who have really trusted Him.  No matter what their creed, whether Lutherans, Greek Church, Romanists, or Protestants, there are in these vast bodies those who have come to Christ, they have given the touch that the Lord knows.  I hope you are one of them.  It is real, personal faith.  “Who touched me?”  The woman went away; she knew she was healed, but the Lord would have her back.

  What does this garment mean that the Lord wears?  It has no seam, woven from the top to the bottom.  What does it mean?  The fulness of the Godhead dwells in Him bodily.  All that God is, He is in Christ.  When you touch Him, all that He is is for you; you may have to learn it bit by bit, but all that He is is for you.  Thank God.  It is all for you, that garment which had no seam.  She touched the hem of His garment.

  She came back; the Lord had His aftermeeting with her.  She came back and she fell down before Him and told Him all.  He loved to be told it.  He knew all about her, He knew every bit of the disappointment, but it is intensely interesting to Christ; the tale of soul history is interesting to Him.  I am glad to say that on behalf of my Master.

  She told Him all the truth.  
The truth about God will make you truthful about yourself.  He knew it, but He loved to be told.  I think I can hear her saying, 
‘Twelve years, Lord, I tried this, that, and the other’.  How He listened with the deepest compassion.  What a blessed Jesus He is, the blessed Son of God.  She told Him all the truth.  Then He said to her, “Daughter”.  If she touched Him by faith He touched her by the Spirit.  If she said, 
‘Lord, I need Thee’, He said, ‘I need you’.  There is a Christian.

  Let us look for one moment at Ephesians 1, the epistle which gives us the highest character of Christian blessing and where the glorious future is unfolded in wonderful language.  It is God's mosaic.

  In the first twelve verses of that chapter you get the blessings of Christians, and then you get the simplest idea of a Christian as setting forth what is here in Mark 5.  The question may be raised - I have heard it raised - and I have said to myself, 
‘How may I know that I am one little bit of stone in this beautiful mosaic?’
  I have seen in Mark's gospel the mosaic work, millions of stones put in marvellous designs most charmingly.  The first twelve verses of this chapter are God's mosaic work.  Am I one little stone in it?  How may I know?  

  The simplest idea of a Christian occurs in this epistle and I call attention to my chapter.  It says here (v 12), “who first trusted in Christ.  In whom ye also trusted”.  Trusted in Christ.  Are you a truster in Christ?  Then you belong to this vast kingdom.  I have thanked God that in the epistle in which there is the highest Christian blessing, the simplest idea of a Christian on the faith side is presented.

  How admirable scripture is!  It does not require a theologian to understand this.  Have you trusted Christ?  “After that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation”.
  
The “word of truth” answers to the garment that had no seam.  The truth about God is in Christ, so that is your salvation.  What God is is your salvation.  They trusted Christ in whom the word of truth was, and the word of truth was their salvation.  
“In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise”.  

  That presents the idea.  She touched Him in faith, and in her touch she said, 
‘Lord, I need Thee’.  He said, “Daughter” to her.  What does that mean?  
‘I will never forget you.  You are an object of interest to Me; there is a link between you and Myself that can never be severed
’.  
You are welcome to the blessing, and it gives Him the greatest possible pleasure to bless you.
  I was going along the city some years ago on a cold wintry morning, and there was a man standing in the gutter holding out bootlaces.  He said, 
‘Buy a bootlace, sir, I haven't had a bite this morning’.  

  I might have said, but I did not, ‘My dear man, do you not see across the street there is wealth, why do you not go and ask for a shovelful of sovereigns.  Wealth is there in millions
’.  When Christ comes it will all be done away with.  What men are trying to do by political efforts will be done away with when Christ comes.  Every Christian feels the need of man.  If I had said to the man, 
‘Wealth is there, go in and ask for some’, do you know what he would have said?  
‘Yes, the wealth is there, but there is no welcome’.  

  The wealth is here in Christ and the welcome is there in like manner.  Just trust Him as you sit there.  He has done everything and His heart is full of compassion.  Is there one sad and weary heart here?
  
You have tried to be good; tried to he better; tried to love God and your neighbour as yourself; yon have been here and there; to everybody but Christ.  Come to Him; trust in Christ.  “In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth”.  

  I was preaching at M-- some years ago I think on this very subject - and all at once there came something to me, and I said to the people, ‘I am going to get off the desk and sit on a chair, I feel I am in the way’.  I did so, and sat down; there was great silence for ten minutes, and during that ten minutes five souls came to Christ as they sat there.
  
You may come to Him now.  May you feel by the Spirit that He is near to you.  May you put out your hand in all your deep need - faith is the hand of need - and say, 
‘Lord, I need Thee’.  He will answer back; He will tell you that you are needed by Him, and it gives Him the greatest possible pleasure to bless you.

  Now here, the child was dead, but the Lord says she sleeps.  Do you know it?  This little rosebud, the delight of her father's heart, was lying there in the silence of death.
  
Do you know it?  There is scarcely a household that has not been interrupted by the rude hand of death.
  
Death is the rude interrupter of everything that is here.  I will put a question to you, and then close.
  
I remember going to see an old gentleman down in Devonshire; I went in and sat down, and he said, ‘Did you observe that beautiful wood as you came up the road?  
I gave three thousand for that, I did not want any neighbours here’.  I said, 
‘Yes, I noticed it’.  He said, 
‘Did you observe the beautiful sea view I have here?’  I said, 
‘Yes, I stood and admired it’.  
Then I said, ‘I am a servant of Christ and am going to visit others, so cannot stay with you long, but I want you to put a question to yourself after I am gone’.  

  He was eager to hear the question, and I said, ‘When I am gone and you sit here in your chair I want you to ask yourself this question, What do I possess outside the reach of death?’  A fine question that.  
‘What do I possess outside the reach of death?’  Put the question to yourself, all of you.  I sit in my room and ask myself that question.  

  What a doleful man, you say.  No, it gives me the greatest possible joy.  I look round on those who love me and my departure would give them sadness; theirs would to me.  I cannot look on any one here outside the reach of death, but my heart gives a leap, for I have got Christ, and He is outside the reach of death.

  I have looked up through my tears into His blessed face in the hour of my bereavement and have said, ‘Lord, I shall never lose Thee’.  No, never lose Him.  Splendid.  Have you ever told Him that?  Are these things what you say on certain occasions?
  
Let them be living realities in your soul.  There is your testimony, not only in saying certain things, but the testimony lies in vitality, and vitality lies in nearness to Christ and in knowing Him.  What a happy thing to ask the question, 
‘What do I possess outside the reach of death?’
  My story is over, poorly I may have presented it, but I plead with you, as I may never see you again - do you not see how you need Him?  If you have a grave in front of you - one step more and you are in it, you do not know how soon; you may be full of health and vigour, but one step and you are in the grave - have you got any one the other side?  Christianity gives you some One the other side of death, the blessed Jesus, the Son of 
God.  May your heart trust in Him, and may you just be led to do it for His name's sake.  Amen.

______________________

“JEHOVAH MY GOD, MY HOLY ONE”
The next three addresses were given at Park Street, Islington, in 1921 and published together in booklet form
THE MORAL FEATURES OF A MAN OF GOD
Habakkuk 1: 1-4, 12;  2: 1-4; 3: 16-19

  I have read these scriptures after deep exercise in regard to God's people and the result of that exercise is that I want to speak to you on subjects that are intensely important, and to draw your attention to some practical things that I trust may be for our profit and blessing.  I am sure they will be so if there is exercise in regard to what we have read.

  One thing that has struck me since I have been here is that I see such a number of young people, and I am rather diverted from the course I intended to take in regard to my subject.  My subject is this - the man of God.  The moral features of a man of God and his sensibilities - that will be my subject in a few words.

  I will say this, that the man of God comes to light in days of departure, and you will find if you look through scripture that there are certain men designated as men of God - and you will invariably find that the man of God comes to light in a time of general departure.  Bear that in mind.  Now I think it is a moment for the man of God at the present time.  One would desire greatly for oneself and for you all that you may come into this and that you may desire to be a man of God at this juncture.

  I remember my beloved mother years ago when I was a boy, how often she said to me looking at me through her tears, ‘I would rather see you a man of God than anything else.  I should not care if you break stones by the wayside for a living so long as you are a man of God
’.  That is what she desired for me, and no advancement in this world whatever.  I am thankful for it and I often think of it.  She did not merely desire that I should be converted and go to heaven at last, but that I should be a man of God down here.  That was her desire and it is a very great thing.  I feel for myself how poorly I have answered to it, still I may say that I desire to be that more than anything, to be a man of God - not a preacher or a teacher or anything of that kind, but a man of God.  Inasmuch as we have here a number of young people I have to say what I did not intend to say, that to be a man of God you must know God.  You must know Him first, 
secondly you must be with Him, and thirdly you must be for Him.  Those are the three things.

  I was told not long since by a brother who was a personal friend of a dear servant of Christ well known to all of us, that when he was dying he said to this friend, ‘I will tell you what is my dying wish for you.  It is that you would preserve the thought of intense individuality
’.  He did not mean by that, that he would divert him from what is corporate; but everything rests here, as to whether we are intensely individual.  Never mind other people, it is easy enough to go along in crowds, especially in a crowd that is in the majority.  You may go in a crowd and not have any affection at all or any history at all.  It is personal history and affection that we need.  We are where we are, and we do what we do, because of personal history and affection.

  If you think of what is corporate, you must admit that blessing depends upon our individual condition, it must depend upon that.  Another thing is that while we have rejoiced in the truth and have had brought before us that which is corporate and what is due to the assembly, which has been so blessedly maintained by the Spirit and has been fruitful in result - I admit all that - yet on the other hand we have our own personal history and cannot set it aside.  That is what is in my mind in these discourses.

  Very well, then, first to be a man of God you must know God.  You cannot be a man of God without knowing Him, that is as certain as anything can be, it goes without saying.

  Those who are older will bear with me while I dwell a little upon a point that I did not intend to dwell upon.  I put it to you all  What has the gospel done for you?  What does God propose in the gospel? What is the nature of the proposal in the gospel?  I draw your attention to this.  You will not find in reading the Acts, where we have the inspired record of the proclamation of the gospel - you will not find in any one of those addresses any such thought as this, that if the audience believed what was presented to them they would go to heaven.  There is not one such thought from beginning to end.  It is not put in that way, and if you pay attention to these things they will help you.  What is the nature of the proposal in the gospel?  Not a word is said about heaven  not a word.  Is that not singular?  Does that arrest your attention?  It should do so.  What then is the nature of the proposal?  The nature of the proposal is that you 
should be forgiven, that you should have remission of sins, and that you should have the Spirit and thus the knowledge of God.
  It is the knowledge of God that is proposed in the gospel and in such a way that the knowledge of God shall make you happy here and now.  That is it.  That is the nature of the proposal.  Is not that splendid?  I could dwell all the evening on that one point, it is so excessively important.  We have escaped from hell and shall be happy by-and-by.  That is in it, but that is not the nature of the gospel.  The nature of the proposal is that you should know God and that you should be happy now and that your happiness should not depend upon your circumstances here.  What a splendid proposal.

  Your knowledge of God will make you so supremely happy that your happiness will not be dependent upon circumstances, whether you have a long purse or a short one, or whether you live in a cottage or a palace.  None of these things constitute the happiness of those who love the Lord.  “The kingdom of God is not in meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost”. 

  Now I would ask this personal question of every one here: Do you find your joy in the knowledge of God Himself?  That is it.  As it says in one of the prophets: “Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the 
mighty man glory in his might, nor the rich man glory in his riches; but he that glorieth let him glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord”.  There is something morally elevating in the knowledge of God, and it puts a true dignity upon you.  You are to be brought into the knowledge of God, that is the nature of the proposal that is unfolded in the gospel.

  Lest you should be mistaken by my remarks if I speak of heaven, let me add that after we receive the Holy Ghost heaven is spoken of, and heaven is always connected with the purpose of God, with the love that wants me there.  There must be the love of God in the heart in order to understand what is heavenly.  It is absolutely necessary to have ourselves pulled up in regard of these things.  Do you know God?  Does it give you pleasure to think of God?  Has the knowledge of God brightened your life?  Do you know Him?  What a real thing it is to know the blessed God.

  I do not ask if you know the truth, this, that, or the other, but do you know God Himself? He does what He does, and gives what He gives, in order that we may know Him, who He is and what He is.  Whatever God does and whatever He gives, the consummation of it all is that we may know the blessed One who has done it all.  Think of forgiveness, I know the blessed God who has forgiven me, therefore I am pretty sure of my forgiveness.  Whatever the blessing may be, it is all in order that I may know God who gives me the blessing.

  The consummation of it all is that we may know God, and the more we are taught by the Spirit the more we take in the knowledge of God.  The truth is unfolded to us, but behind it all is the knowledge of the blessed God.  That is the part that I did not intend to say, but I trust it may be of some value to those who are young in the faith, as well as some incitement to us who are older.  My true expansion lies in my knowledge of God  not in my knowledge of the truth.  We may talk of all manner of things, but do we know God? that is the question.

  Let me tell you that your knowledge of God is discovered to you in need - in adversity.  Adverse circumstances will expose to you your knowledge of God.  If you sink under adversity your spiritual strength is small, and He permits this state to come upon us to shew how little has been our advancement.  A dear brother whom I knew some years ago, and who was well taught in the truth, said to me, as he lay on his death-bed, while the tears ran down his cheeks, 
‘My dear brother, I have had to come here to find out how very little I really did know’.  It is a fine thing to have your true measure with God.  Never mind what the brethren think about you.  You may have a spiritual reputation and it may not be worth one straw.  It is what God thinks about you.  I am not diverting you from that which is corporate and which is so blessed, which we know and enjoy in regard to the truth of the house of God and other things, but I impress upon you the individual side, as I told you that dear brother said, 
‘I commend to you the thought of intense individuality’. 
  I come now to another thing and that is to be with God.  The man of God knows God and he is with Him.  It is interesting to see that the man of God comes to light in a dark hour.  The first man of God is Moses  I allude to him as the first man of God - I mean in historical order.  The fourth book of the Psalms begins with Psalm 90, and is the prayer of the man of God - Moses.  This book has for its subject the bringing in of the only begotten Son into the world; it is the setting up of what is so largely 
spoken of in scripture - the world to come - and the prayer of Moses stands at the head of that book of the psalms.
  You remember how the book so sweetly closes - I cannot refrain from alluding to it “And let all the people ssay, Amen”.  I pass from this world and all its confusion.  How can you be with God without feeling what is going on around you?  Do you think there is such a thing as being separate from the confusion and yet being indifferent to it?  Surely not.

  If I am with God I have sensibilities and I feel what sad confusion this poor world is in; but it will be ended - Christ will end all the confusion, and He will end the confusion in your soul - but I speak now of the world to come.  “
And let all the people say, Amen”.  It is the triumph of God.  It often looks as if Satan is having his own way in the confusion that is going on.  All the confusion is the result of the will of man.  When your will is gone there is no confusion in your soul; 
‘Every one shall say, Amen’.  How one's heart rejoices to think of that.

  I remember telling a young man this some years ago.  He was a highly sensitive man, and he said to me, 
‘I am very thankful for what you have told me, for I always had the feeling that the devil would get the best of it, but now I see that God shall have the best of it’.  He rejoiced in the thought that God would have His way and His will on this earth.  Think of it.  Everybody in the world under one love and under one will.  So shall it be.  He will bring it about.  He will bring man down - man will be weakened down to it - and in his misery and in his weariness he will come right down and will find God there - then he will be lifted up.  Thank God.

  It is a long history I know, but still the end will be that all shall say Amen.  “
all the people say, Amen”.  Every one will be under one love and under one will.  What a magnificent thing that is.  Now you and I sojourning here and passing through to our heavenly rest can find comfort and rest in the thought of what God will have down here at the end.  It is the triumph of God.

  Moses prays for the world to come.  He prays in the presence of the awful confusion recorded in Numbers 14.  Israel had turned their backs on the purpose of God, and had come under the judgment of God governmentally, and God says, “
Your carcases shall fall in this wilderness”; but in the midst of it all - how blessed it is - in the midst of disaster God says, “As truly as I live, saith the Lord, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord”.  The dark departure of Israel suffering under God's hand - and righteously so - and yet God says, “The whole earth shall be 
filled with the glory of the Lord”.  Nothing shall defeat My purpose.

  The first prayer of the man of God is connected with the condition of things set before us in the fourth book of psalms.  He knew God, and when a man knows God he can speak boldly to God.  He knew God, and he says, “From everlasting to everlasting
, thou art God”.  That is the man of God - he knows God.  As He said in Exodus 3, when Moses said, What shall I say when the people challenge me as to who has sent me?  God says, You say I AM THAT I AM hath sent you.  I remain what I am and nothing can change me.  That is what God is.  Byand-by Israel will find out the I AM in Jesus.  We have found it out in Him.  If we have found anything we have found God in Jesus, that He is the I AM.

  “Before Abraham was I AM”.  He is the One who was before Abraham, and poor Israel by-and-by will learn the meaning of Jesus.  Does your heart delight in the thought of that?  Moses says it, and he prays for it and he prays for the world to come.  He states what man is and he states what God is.  Then having stated what man is - as I have often said - Moses reads the funeral service.  Most people are under Moses, but Christians have no funeral service.

  He is so with God that he feels the condition of God's people and he bears it up before God on his spirit.  That is the mark of a spiritual man.  Being indifferent to the ruin of the church or looking at the church from the responsibility side is no proof of spirituality, but otherwise.  It is impossible for a man to be with God in the knowledge of what the church should have been in responsibility without being affected by it.  As sure as anything, that will be the first thing.  I do not say that such an one will get under the power of evil, but he will feel it; he will have sensibilities.

  Did you ever shed a tear over the ruin of the church?  Have you felt the terrible disaster - I am looking at the church from that aspect in which it is proper to look at it.  You cannot be with God without feeling the condition of things - not only in the world, but the poor church in its awful confusion, the apostasy it is in - most terribly.  If you are with God you will feel it.  I could give you many scriptures to shew you what I say.  In Ezekiel you find the mark was to be put on those who cried for the 
abominations that were done.  You remember in chapter 9 judgment was to begin at the house of God, but there was a mark to be put on those who sighed and cried.  That man will be richly compensated, and he will know God in a peculiar way, that is certain.

  Now this man cried.  He bore the burden before God, though he was not under grace as we are.  From verse 5 onward to verse 12 God says, I am going to punish My people.  He will bring up the Assyrians to punish His people.  Now look, Habakkuk bows and says, “Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God? ... we shall not die”.  That is like Moses - “Thou, Lord, art from everlasting to everlasting”.

  God sends up the Assyrians.  They are allowed of God to chastise the people.  “Thou hast established them for correction”.  But he bows and says, 
‘We shall not be crushed, we shall not die’. 
  What promotes life amongst us?  The promotion of life has been the trials of the last five years, but we have not been killed by them.  There has been life out of it, far more life out of it than sitting here reading the scriptures which we do so comfortably.  I have often asked, What is going to happen to make the truth good in our souls?

  My beloved young brethren, do you expect anything from this world?  Are you astonished at what people do?  Why are you astonished?  I am not astonished, I have thought this last week, why am I allowed to live here?  If Satan had his way he would crush me.  It is the mercy of God, the protection of God that keeps you.  I beg your attention to these things.  God has kept you.  If the devil had his way he would sweep us out of this world, and so I do not expect anything from it.  Do you get disappointed because man is unrighteous?  Have you realised the fact that there is no good in man?  We find it out the moment thing happen wrongly, but do we believe what we say  “there is none righteous, no not one”?  “Thou hast established them for correction”.  We shall not die.  By these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit.

  Would you like a simple pathway, to glide down the stream of time without any exercises and without a deeper knowledge of God?  It is in your trials that you get a deeper knowledge of God.  It is a splendid moment in your history when you are shut up to God and no one can help you but God.  It is the finest thing that can happen to you and you never forget it.  You learn what God can do for you in a strait where no human 
help can come.  “Thou hast established 
them for correction”, and then he calls God his rock.  “Thou art a rock”; I like that.  God is called a rock.

  There are two ways in which He is called a rock in Hebrew.  The first thing is rock and shelter, and the other word is a rock of impregnability, and that is a rock on which you stand unmoved.  It is the same word that is used for the city of Tyre, which was built on a rock right out at sea, and all the waves of the sea could not disturb it.  You are sheltered in the rock and you are immovable on the rock.  God is the Rock Moses says in his song, “They forsook 
… the Rock” and all along the chapter you notice it - He is the Rock.  That is a fine thing.  Do you stand on it?  My blessing lies in what God is to my heart.  People may change, circumstances may change, but He abides what He is.  May the Lord give you a deep sense in your soul of knowing Him as the Rock.

  Habakkuk pursues his subject.  He says, 
‘I do not understand it.  The people you are using to discipline your people are worse than the people you are disciplining.  I do not understand it
’.  What is he going to do now? How is the problem to be solved?  He says, “I will 
stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower … to see what He will say unto me”.  Here we have it.  The man of God is seen here, it is the house seen here.  These are the things of God.  He gets above it all and gets where there is a solution for everything in the house, and he gets the solution.  What is God's answer to that? - to all the upheavals?

  Blessed man that he is, blessed in his sorrow.  He loved God and he loved His people.  He is not thinking of himself at all he is thinking about God's people.  Now he gets up into the tower and what does he see there?  He saw a vision.  What did he see?  The world to come.  He was to write it.  The Lord said “Write the vision”.  Write it down, not only so, engrave it on tablets.  Where is the engraving?  In Hebrews 11 it is seen.  There were Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham Isaac, Jacob: they are all written there livingly, they were in the faith of the world to come, and it is written there.

  Is it written on your heart?  Write it there livingly.  Engrave it there livingly so that those who read may run.  

  If you live in the light of another world you run out of this world.  It is because we are so much at home in this world that we do not run out of it.  If you live in the light of the world that is set forth in Hebrews, and in the 
light of that blessed Man who lives before God, you come into the light of another world and you hasten out of this.  Hence the running.  “Let us run with patience the race”.  “Let us run”. 

  It is no use telling me to be unworldly; you must give me the light and joy of another world to make me leave this world.  I must have the light of another world.  God grant that we may cultivate being with God, that we may know what being with God means; we may talk about it and explain it, but we must be there with God, and when you are there, there is no confusion there.  Christ is there - not the Christ in connection with your need, though that is very blessed, too, in the early part - but it is Christ there, the Man for God's pleasure, in whom that moral feature of the world to come is seen.  Every feature in Him will be displayed by-and-by.  And so it says here that he was to write it so that he who reads may run.

  “The vision is yet for an appointed time … though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come”.  Do you not see how the Spirit of God transposes it!  “He that shall come will come”.  (Heb 10: 37)

  It can only be in the light of the world to come.  “He that shall come will come, and will not tarry”.  We wait for Him.  He will set up what we enjoy in His blessed company now.  We see Him now, the Man for God's pleasure - every moral feature is found in Him and He is the One who will bring others into His moral features.  Let me pause before such a thing.

  You remember the dying thief.  We often admire the grace that could say, “Today shalt thou be with me”, and we know very well that his title to be there was because the Person who was dying by his side was dying for him.  The Spirit of God was brooding over the soul of that man, and was working there and making that man move away from himself.  Did you ever think of that? He said, 
‘I have done everything amiss’, but he goes from the man who has done everything amiss to the Man who has done nothing amiss.
  He travelled that moral journey from himself to Christ - he recognised the moral beauty of the One there by his side.
  He looked underneath it all, his eye guided by the Spirit, and he came to the blessed conclusion that none other than He should be King, and so he says, “Remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom”.  (Luke 23: 3.)  Think of Him there, an Object of scorn, but he could see under all that 
the moral beauty of the Man who was there and say, “Remember me”.  
‘None but Thou canst be King’.  He passed in a rapid moment, though perhaps it takes us years and years to travel the journey from self to Christ so that Christ may be before your heart and not yourself at all.  Think of the moral perception of the man who could see underneath that shame and scorn that none other could be King.

  Now Habakkuk gets his text - “Hhis soul which is lifted up is not upright in him: but the just shall live by his faith”.  If your soul is inflated you are not upright.  “The soul that is lifted up is not upright
 … but the just shall live by his faith”.  I come now to the final features.  The Lord says, “The earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea”.  In the middle of all that black description of what man is, God speaks and says, As the waters cover the sea, so the knowledge of the glory of the Lord shall cover the earth.  What a blessed thing!

  Now I come to the end.  He gets the prayer.  If you are marked by these sensibilities you are to be a man of prayer.  These are the days when we are to be here for God.

  On the one hand feeling what is around us, but on the other hand knowing what shall be.  In the light of that other world we can be in God's hand and can move forward.  We do not want to be unduly depressed.  I would rather live now than at Pentecost.  I would rather be here just now than seven years ago.  Why?  It is the moment when we can learn what the Lord can do and what He can be for us in the power of the Spirit.

  So he prays, “Revive thy work, O Lord”.  Your true interest in anything is seen in the measure in which you are interested in it privately - when no eye but God's can rest upon you.  In the light of what he has seen here in chapter 
2 he prays, “Revive thy work, O Lord”. 
  There is going to be a revival - not of such a kind that it will attract the attention of men - but a true and deep revival of affection right in the heart, of affection for Christ.  That is the nature of the revival.  Not only so, but it is coming as certain as I am here, and there will accompany that revival a deep evangelical feeling that will flow out to others, for it is impossible to have a deep sense of the love of Christ without its flowing out to others.  Not in the excitement of nature, but a true, deep working of 
the Spirit, and let me say to you, that the measure in which you mourn for the ruin is the measure in which you will be used to those who are in it.
  You can separate from it in a cold, legal way without a touch of feeling, but I believe that those who take the ground of 2 Timothy will be marked by brokenness of spirit.  If we are to separate from evil you will depart with a mourning spirit and a broken heart, because you see things in the light of the glory of God.  Can you understand a broken heart and a rejoicing heart? I am afraid of a legal separation where there is no feeling; there must be feeling, or it is not of God.  You may judge how far you have taken that line.  The majority of us have never had to take that position - we have never had the pain, the excessive pain, of separation; but if you do you will be tender and gracious.  You will not say, Let us hoist our flag and stand up.  That is not of the Spirit.  You can be faithful and yet have the gracious Spirit of Christ.  That is what we want, the gracious Spirit of Christ, and yet to be true to principles - but to have this tender feeling.

  You come to the end of the book.  I do not know anything that speaks of the collapse of a man so strongly as verse 16 of this chapter.  It is a verse that we have often looked at and considered, this and verse 17.  “My belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself”.  It is in accord with his testimony.  All these things shew the total collapse of the man.

  “Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls”.  What desolation.  What a collapse of man, and what desolation of his circumstances.  But now look - “Yet”. - “Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation”.  My heart is deeply affected.  I long to know this better.  It is here that the man is proved as to what he is.  “Yet” - not withstanding my utter collapse - these circumstances of utter desolation.

  There comes from such a man a sweet song to God.  That is the music that God loves to hear.  I put my ear close to it and I come to the blessed Person in God’s presence.  Dark and desolate are the circumstances, but I am in the presence of perfection in the midst of disaster.  There was not one bright spot for Jesus, God's true Servant, but He says, 
‘I will praise thee”’.  Not for others but praise for God.  A song for the ear of God.  
How God’s ear - the Father’s ear  turned to the sweetness of it.  “I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth”. 

  How dark the circumstances, nothing could be darker, but a note of praise came from His blessed lips.  How God loves Him for it.  How sweet is the music from a broken heart.  No will there.  “Even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight”.  A note of praise came up.  Where is this going on?  I am permitted sometimes to see it and my heart is glad.  The note comes up sweetly to Him.  No memory recitation of truth.  Mere repetition of truth is not praise; but from a broken heart that feels deeply, and a heart subject to the things of God, rises the song to the chief Singer upon stringed instruments.  That is it.

  The Apostle Paul in the dark circumstances in the prison at Rome, suffering through his own failure - though we speak very carefully of that - could say, “Rejoice in the Lord alway: and again I say, Rejoice”.  I may write that upon a piece of paper - I have done so and have had to burn it because I was not up to it - but you must be there yourself, it is no use indulging in platitudes, but the apostle says, “Rejoice in the Lord alway”.  He is a prisoner, he is in dark circumstances, but he has a rejoicing heart.  His heart rejoices even in that dark cell.  I think I can hear the jailer say, 
‘He is the same kind of man as he was when we first knew him; when he was thrust into the inner prison he sang praises to God’. 
  I am afraid some of our songs are dying down.  How sweetly we sang under pressure; now the pressure is removed, what then?  It is pressure that brings it out, as it is here.  May the Lord in His grace be pleased to bless these few remarks.  I am sure that you must know God in order that you may be with Him, and if you are with Him you know Him; that is the man of God.

  Will you be a man of God?
_______________________
  
  
  
  

THE SERVANT OF GOD AND HIS CHARACTERISTICS
Exodus 21: 1-6; Psalm 40: 5-9; Isaiah 50: 1-11
  You will remember that in my last address the subject was the “man of God”.  I desired to shew the features of the man of God; the sensibilities of the man of God, and the resources of the man of God; and I made the remark that I supposed we all pretty well knew that the man of God comes to light when things are going to the bad; God has had in the last days those who have stood for Him, and therefore the man of God comes to light in a dark day, such a day as we are in at the present moment.

  I am speaking now of the condition of the church of God looked at down here, set up in responsibility, in great privilege, but responsibility.
  That was my subject last week, and I will endeavour now to bring before you another subject of importance which I trust will be of help to you, and that is - the servant of God.  I want to say a little to you about it that may be of a practical nature, because that is what is on my mind, not so much to unfold the truth but to turn to some points that may be of real value to us at this moment, and I trust that something may come to you that will be of practical value.

  Now the passages I have read are well known to us all, and we have before us in the precept which is found in the Book of Exodus (we all know it and delight in it), we have before us the Lord Jesus Christ, the perfect Servant.
  You will remember doubtless that God acted in the thought of the deliverance of His people Israel, the object of that deliverance was that they should be set free to serve Him.  You remember how God spoke in the early part of this book, “Let my son go, that he may serve me”.  That was the object of His deliverance and His intervention.  He regarded Israel in that light; there was affection and it is “Let my son go, that he may serve me”.  “His firstborn son”, which gives us at once the thought that all true service must be rendered in affection.

  I want to give you a practical thought.  The spring of all true service lies in affection.  

  I need scarcely say that the word servant refers particularly to that which is priestly.  They were set free in order that they might be a nation of priests - that was the thought that God had to serve Him in that way.  That is the thought very largely.  It is not as we understand it, activity in service going out to others, though that is true, as we have seen in our readings in the Book of Numbers, but I call attention to the fact that no service could possibly be pleasing to God that had not love for its source and spring.

  Love is the spring of all true service.  It has often been remarked how touching it is when we come to this first precept given to Israel, we see the way in which God will be served.  The priest is a most beautiful type of the Lord Jesus Christ.  Love is demanded, as you know, in the previous chapter, it is God demanding love; but here there was one, in precept the type of the Lord, who responds.  The blessed Lord came into Manhood to be a Servant.  He came in by His body and He served, and His service was so perfect that He could go out free; having served perfectly He could go out by Himself.  But He plainly said, “I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free”.  What then is the spring of all that service - “I love”. 

  How sweetly it sounds after chapter 20 where love is demanded.  Here we have in precept a type of Christ where His heart responds to God; He has found One to respond to Him, “I love”. 

  Well then, that is the spring of all true service.  You know very well in the Gospel by Mark - which presents the Lord in the perfection of His service - that the Servant is the Son of God.  It is in the spirit of sonship that true service is rendered.  The Servant is the Son of God, but there is no genealogy in Mark, you are immediately presented to the Son of God who comes to serve.

  Then you get all the features in that early chapter of Mark.  He is greeted as Son, He is in touch with heaven; He is morally with God, He is victorious over Satan, and He moves forward in Mark 1 as the perfect Servant.  He is the Son of God.  He is in that relationship, and in that relationship He serves, and all His service is set forth in Mark in a blessed way; not only what He did but the way in which He did it; all His service was rendered in the power of love.  That is, His communion was unbroken, and hence His service was the outcome of a condition in which He was abidingly without anything to hinder; so the service of the Gospel 
of Mark was carried out in the communion of the Gospel of John.  Thus it always is, affection is behind all true service; there is no legality in true service, it is a joyful thing, and has for its spring divine love.

  Here we have at once the One who is presented as the true Servant.  He went to the door-post.  We are introduced to it in Isaiah, where you have the servant and the door-post, it all comes to light in that book.  Here it is that in the precept you have the “I love”.  In the ark of the covenant you have the “I love”.  The ark was a beautiful type of Christ.  You go from precept to furniture, and from the furniture to the psalm where you get the prophetic scripture.

  You need the Spirit, but the ark of the covenant was a piece of furniture, there was nothing in it in itself save what it teaches; but when you come to Psalm 40 it is more living.  You have the ark of the covenant, but it is prophetic of' Christ.  He is living and we go back and understand  it; we understand the furniture and the precept, as we go back from Psalm 40 and see how livingly He speaks in this remarkable psalm.

  This psalm is very beautiful in its order, the first four verses being the conclusion and verse 5 being where it begins.  It really begins, “Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou hast done, and thy thoughts which are to us-ward”. 

  I pause for one moment and ask you all where you learn the thoughts of God towards you?  In Christ.  What a blessed thing it is to know that Christ is so great and can present all the thoughts of God.  What a wonderful Person!  You see there “Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire”.  They were imperfect, but we have taken up the type and we hear His voice, “Lo, I come to do thy will, O God
”.  
“A body hast thou prepared me”.  He comes in by His body in that way, and then He says, “I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart”. 

  How striking it is and necessary for us to remember that whatever we desire to be and whatever we ought to be is presented livingly in a Person, and you cannot be what you desire to be or what you ought to be unless you are under the influence of Christ.  There is nothing could possibly give God pleasure that does not find its spring in Christ.

  It is all seen in Him, and hence we need to come under His influence to answer to Him for the pleasure of God.  No matter what it may be, it is in Christ you see it; in Christ you learn it, but let me say this, that the 
ministry is effectual only in the measure in which Christ is presented to the affections of God’s people; no matter what you may be calling attention to, everything is vested in Christ, and everything is effectual only in the measure in which Christ is presented to His people.  I may take up things in an abstract way, but everything is presented in Christ and I trust the Spirit will help me to present Christ; no matter what the subject may be that I am pressing, it is in Christ and that is where we learn it.

  Well now, having said that, I will move on immediately to what is more directly before me.  I have read this psalm because it is where Christ is seen as the One who answers to the covenant.  “I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart”.  The One who loves is there, and there was everything in that blessed Man responsive to God for His pleasure; everything that was well-pleasing to God was found in Him.  Anything that comes from you or from me must come that way, it is in the measure in which we are under His influence that there could possibly be anything for God's pleasure.

  I come now to Isaiah, and would say this first, that there are two books of Isaiah.  I mean there are two distinct parts of the Book of the prophet Isaiah, and each book is introduced by a king, as far as I understand it.  The first part of chapter 6 starts, “In the year that king Uzziah died”.  There is a leprous king introduced there, a kind of frontispiece.  The leprous king represented the uncleanness of the nation.  There was the glory of the Lord and the prophet discovered that he was unclean, he was leprous; and therefore the key to that section of Isaiah lies in the word “holiness”.  There are the seraphim, representing holiness, and hence that part of Isaiah is connected very largely with holiness.  He is the Holy One - if you will pursue it.

  In the next part of Isaiah you get introduced to another king, Hezekiah, and the principle of death and resurrection comes to light.  He was recovered from his sickness; that is the frontispiece to the second part of Isaiah, and the key to that part of Isaiah which we are now about to consider lies in the word “righteousness”.  On the one hand the seraphim are there giving character to it, and on the other hand there are the cherubim where you have the thought of righteousness.  Hence the word righteousness occurs about fifty times in the second part of this book.  I have referred to that hurriedly but it is very interesting.

  Now what is introduced in this second part is the servant.  The servant has a great place in this part of the book, if you will notice, “Israel my servant”, “Jacob my servant”.  It constantly speaks of the servant, that is another word which is a key to this part of Isaiah.  It is the servant.  Israel and Jacob will be the servants of God; they will come into it by-and-by, but it must be in connection with Christ.

  How lovely it is in reading the prophets where you get a dark picture and where the things are exposed as to what they really were, the state of the things, yet in the midst of it all God introduces Christ; that is the way of recovery.  He introduces Christ.  He must do so.  It is very sweet in the middle of a dark description of the condition of the people, there is the thought of recovery, and where there is the thought of recovery, Christ is introduced.  Hence it is the true Israel, and the servant is presented very distinctly in this part of the Book of Isaiah.

  I come immediately to this remarkable chapter, chapter 49 being an introduction to it.  The early part of this chapter is very touching.  It is He who speaks, there is the Deity, the attributes of God, and you glide from Deity into humanity without any explanation.  This is very important to remember.  It is so also in the Book of Psalms; where His true humanity is insisted on, yet His Deity is asserted.  I cannot explain it, no one can, but there it is, all through the Book of the Psalms.

  We must have maintained in our souls the Deity of Christ; for if we do not we unconsciously drop into irreverence; we do not mean to be irreverent, but we do sometimes drop into unconscious irreverence when we speak of Him as a Man.  He is truly a Man, but He is God, ever God blessed for ever, and in our hearts there should be at all times the sense of the Deity of Christ.  We may regard Him in His true and perfect humanity with reverent hearts, but He is ever God.

  He never ceased to be what He was because of what He became.  He cannot cease to be what He was.  He ever remains as to His Person, God ever God, the eternal Son of God
4.  He remains that, and this should be and has been cherished in the hearts of Christians.  Whenever we look, as we are about to do, at His true humanity, we should never overlook His Deity.  You go from Deity to humanity without any explanation.  It cannot be explained.  If you try to explain it you get into disaster.  He is seen here in His perfection, in His seven years of service if you like - He is seen as the One who is fitted to be the Administrator.  He listens.  His 
ability to speak a word in season to those who are weary is that He took the place of a listener.  It is excessively important to be a listener - an upturned ear.  Hence, do you not see, He is constantly in that condition or position, and there was also the outflow to the sad and the weary.

  If you are not a listener you will never be one who can meet those who are sad and weary.  So it says here, The Lord God has given me the tongue of a disciple or an instructed one.  “The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned”.  My point is this, beloved brethren, if we read ministry or if we listen to ministry, do we hear His voice?  If you do not there will be no effect, the thing will fail as far as you are concerned.  The thing is to hearken; God raises up instruments, those who can minister, but in that ministration the thing is whether you are really a listener and hearken to His voice.  I feel I have poorly presented it to you; but I will now turn to Proverbs which will perhaps help you.  “Bow down thine ear”.  (Prov 22: 17)  There must be the spirit of subjection.  You bow down your ear and hear.  That is it.  What is next?  “And apply thine heart to my knowledge”.  There is subjection, and there is not only subjection, but you apply your heart to its application.  You apply your heart, not your head.  No, no, not your head but your heart.  It is a question of affection, you apply your heart.  What next?  “It is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee” (as food is kept - in the margin).

  The pleasantness lies in the retention of it, which supposes exercise; that is the point.  Are you exercised in regard to what you hear?  “It is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee”.  It is kept there, and it becomes a part of yourself.  Mind, in your heart, not in your head, “They shall withal be fitted to thy lips”.  From your heart it comes to your lips.  Nothing else could be effectual.  “They shall 
withal be fitted to your lips”.  It is what comes from the heart.

  Follow the scripture.  You bow down your ear and hear, and you apply your heart  that is application, and it is a pleasant thing if you keep them within thee - that is retention, as in the margin, as food is kept - you digest it.  Then you get the pleasantness of it, the joy of it.  What next? “It shall be fitted to your lips”.  Oh, blessed lips! 

  Turn back to the psalm again and hear what the Lord says - “I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart”.  “I have not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou knowest”.  No, what was in His heart came out in testimony.  “I have not refrained my lips O Lord, thou knowest”. 

  That is the kind of ministry we want; that is it, the ministry that comes up from the heart; that comes from one who knows what it means and enjoys what it is, and does not refrain his lips - he could not refrain.  He knows how to speak a word in season to those who are weary.  I hope you do not object to what I am saying.  If you do, you object to what the Lord has given me to say, though I am conscious how poorly I have presented it.  It is a very great thing to be a listener, you cannot be an administrator unless you listen to Him, and mind, it is morning by morning.

  Think of the blessed Lord taking such a place as that - the humility of it, that upturned ear.  Whoever was a listener like the Lord a continuous listener in His true and proper position as Servant, His ear was open for communications constantly.  Wonderful communications on the Mount of Olives when He retired, special communications at such moments; but He was constantly a listener, and hence there was from His blessed heart the outflow, His lips moved with His heart, “I have not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou knowest”. 

  That blessed Jesus the Lord, how perfectly He administered.  One loves to think of that mark of affection.  You remember how Peter came out in his feverish way  Peter was naturally a feverish man - his heart delighted in the thought that his Master was sought after and he came into the solitude of the Lord and said, 
‘All men seek after Thee, all the streets are full of people to hear Thee’.  What was the result of His listening?  He said, 
‘Let, us go into the next town’.  He was not to be diverted by a feverish man, though this man had affection for Him and was delighted in the thought that his Master was sought after.  The Lord give us grace to be listeners, and it is not only listening with the outward ear and the mind working on these things, but you apply your heart, and you retain it, in your heart, and then you find the pleasantness of it.  We often find pleasure in listening, but the pleasure dies away.  You say, What a beautiful meeting that was, but the pleasure dies away!  The pleasantness is not only in the listening but in the exercise about it - you digest it, you 
go over it and it comes to you then in all its wonderful power - you make it your own, and what you say is your own, you say it, in your own way.
  My beloved brethren, it is easy enough to listen, easy enough to repeat what is said;  but all that is practically worthless unless it is what comes from your own heart as the result of listening and exercise. and so it is fitted to your lips and it gives you great confidence in God
 - “that thy trust may be in the Lord”.  “Have not I written to thee excellent things in counsels and knowledge, that I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth?”

  Certainty.  Where do you get certainty?  Do you think you could be diverted from what the Spirit of God has produced in your soul?  You can be diverted from the things that you entertain with your mind, but this produces certainty, you know certainty.

  Now you are ready and people will send for you.  It says so.  “That I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth; that thou mightest answer the words of truth to them that send unto thee”.  Some one will be sending for you.  The Lord will look after that, He does not give it you for yourself, you will find ways and means will be opened for you, some one will be sent to you - the sad and weary.  It would be a sad day if at any time in our meetings - our gospel meetings, for instance - when sad and weary souls who are exercised - and remember in this great apostasy there are those who sigh and cry in distress - if they turned into our meetings and found nothing to meet them, it would be a sad day - a sad day when people give up the simple gospel.

  Why do you not have courage, my brother, to preach a simple gospel? Never mind the exposition; never mind pleasing the saints; it is what the Lord thinks, not what the saints think.  I would rejoice in all the unfolding of scripture, but preach the gospel.  I have had great exercise about it; forgive me speaking about myself.

  I was speaking at a certain place - no matter where - and I commenced with the songs of scripture, the song of the Red Sea, and the song of “Spring up, O well” - there is gospel in that - and I made the remark that there were five other songs in the Old Testament and I should like to take them up one after the other.  The people were very interested, and I said I would take up the other five songs in the Old Testament.

  I got before the Lord and prayed about it, and He said to me, ‘If some poor sinner comes in, some sad and weary heart, what would there be for such?’  Let us think of such.  I turned aside the next Sunday and said, 
‘I cannot go on with what I purposed’.  No doubt the people would have been pleased and I should have been pleased to do so but the Lord put His hand on me and said: 
‘You preach the simple gospel’. 
  Some one said to me a little while ago, ‘Anybody would think you had just been forgiven, the way you talk about forgiveness’.  That is how it should be.  Do you think I should lose the sense of my forgiveness, no matter how far I had advanced in the truth?  No, you get widened in it.  I joy in my forgiveness now just as much as I ever did.  What I am pressing now is, get with the Lord; never m
ind what people think or what people approve of, get with the Lord and get your communications from Him; there will be your ability to speak a word in season to those who are weary.
  I am conscious that while I am here there is a movement of the Spirit of God in the direction of the gospel at this time; a quiet movement going on in the hearts of a good many in regard to this matter, for which I am deeply thankful.  I ask you to consider it.  What light He has given us, what wonderful light!  Has He given it you for yourself?  Does He love His people?  I appeal to you, do you think we are peculiar favourites of His?  No; - He loves all His people.  Has not He blessed us with light?  He has.  What for?  Surely to diffuse it.

  I am not thinking of anything of an excitable nature that people can take cognisance of publicly; I am thinking of a desire in our hearts that other people should be the recipients of the light which He has given us so blessedly and mercifully.  May the Lord stir up our hearts with a real earnest desire; it will be so if we are listeners, if our ears are open.  It is impossible to receive anything from God without having the same kind of feeling that God has given it to you.

  When you get anything from God it is God that gives it to you, and He passes over His feeling to you, so that you immediately desire that others should receive what you have received.  If you have got it in your mind only it will not work out.  “It is a pleasant thing if you keep them within 
thee”. 
  I will proceed from that to another side of the truth.  Sometimes we are afraid to listen because of the consequences.  It says here, “I was not rebellious, neither turned away back”.  I believe some of us are afraid to listen because we feel it is going to make a demand on us; you will not go forward, because it will make a demand.  Every bit of truth and light that God gives us, in the very nature of things, makes a demand on us.  The blessed Lord says, “I was not rebellious, I did not turn back”.  “I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair”.  “I hid not my face from shame and spitting”.  Blessed Lord; He accepts it.  I am down here for the will of God; and let me tell you, where the truth is really known, if it is operative in your souls, you are going to have opposition; people shrink away from you; but there are great compensations, and you are prepared for it.  How touching are His words, “I did not turn back”.  Blessed Jesus, how faithful He was.  How He bore the opposition of man, because the opposition of man is against the will of God, and here was One who was found in God's will.  Are you up against it?  Are you afraid of consequences?  There may be some who say, “If I take such a step, what will happen to me; I am afraid to take it”. 

  There is a moment to make a decision.  Perhaps that is now.  Many of us are brought up m our histories as to whether we can trust God.  Can you trust God?  What will be the consequences to me if I take such a step?  Can you trust God?  Here was One who trusted God and God justified Him.

  O that blessed One, Jesus the perfect Servant.  He moved forward regardless of consequences; He has not turned back, but was found down here in the way of God's will and God justified Him, and will justify all that which is of Himself.  In the midst of it, when you are with God, men look like grasshoppers to you; “the moth shall eat them up”.  Man is an insignificant creature.

  One of the proofs of your being with God is that you have a proper estimation of man.  They are nothing but poor changing creatures; the moth will eat them up.  The Lord here says that in the spirit of prophecy in regard to man 
- “They shall all wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up”.  Those very people that pluck off the hair and smite Him; they are nothing but grasshoppers.

  Now look at the last few verses of our chapter, pay attention to them.  It says here, “Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the 
voice of his servant; that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God”. 
  If you are with God you can afford to wait.  Wait.  Have you no light?  Wait.  Need I say to you - it must occur to your mind  that in this listening we have Mary sitting at the feet of Jesus, listening.  She comes under Him as Head and therefore she listens; she receives an impression from Him.  Martha is cumbered with much serving, but Mary is a listener and the Lord says, “One thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part”.  Why was it a good part?  Because it was His part.  “Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her”.  Why shall it not be taken away from her? Because it is His own part.  So there He justifies Mary.

  Now you remember in John 11 she sat still in the house. That remarkable chapter is lit up with the glory.  Now you remember in John 11 she sat still in the house.  That remarkable chapter is lit up with the glory of God - death and sorrow are there but shining resplendent above it all the glory of God as it always does.  One Man in it - the blessed Son of God  no stumbling there, He is walking in the day, walking in the light, there is no stumbling; and you never stumble if you walk in the light of the glory of God.  Never.

  We often say, ‘Shew us thy way’.  Why do we not say, 
‘Shew us thy glory’?  and then we shall learn His way.  Mary sat still in the house. She says, 
‘I do not know but I will wait until He calls me’.  She sat still.  All were perturbed in that chapters save the Son of God and Mary.  The Son of God in the light of the day and in the light of all that was going to occur, but Mary sat still.  I will tell you what listening will do for you, it will make you sit still and wait.

  Instead of that, the next verse is what we do, we cannot wait for light, we look around for some providential sticks and make a fire for ourselves.  We know what that means we cannot wait, and you can always find some providential sticks and make a fire, and put your sticks together  and  rejoice  in  the  sparks, but you will 
lie down in sorrow; out that fire will go; you  made it, and if you are looking about for some indication you can always find some sticks, but, you will lie down in sorrow.  “Let him wait”,.  

  I am feeling in my soul here that this particular word is needed by some one.  You say, “I have no light”. Only wait, He will give you light, do not be impatient.  How dangerous this impatience is; we must have light, and we make light for ourselves, but we lie down in sorrow.

  I wanted to say a little on the hearken in the next, chapter - the great Hearkener, the One who hearkens, whose ear is open to God.
  Now the next chapter starts with “Hearken to me ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the Lord: look unto the rock from whence you were hewn, and to the hole of the pit from whence ye were digged”.  
Be encouraged; the little ones, the feeble remnant, look into the pit from which You were digged.  See how Abraham was alone, and how God made of that man which was alone a nation.  That is the first hearken.

  Then again hearken.  The law comes from Jehovah ; man and his will goes.  Then there is the third hearken.  “ Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is m
y law”.  
The law that had been reviled; the law that, had been made good in their hearts, and they were to hearken.  Those are the three hearkens; and then, Awake.  They ask Jehovah to wake up for their salvation, and then Jehovah turns round and says, 
‘You wake up to what I have been doing for you in My discipline; wake up and see your redemption’. 
  The last awaken is, “Put on thy beautiful garments … shake thyself from the dust”.  If they had beautiful garments they had beautiful feet; they became evangelists.  If you have beautiful garments you will have beautiful feet.  “How beautiful are the feet of 
him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace”.  Their beautiful garments are in the beauty of Christ, and the joy of Christ, and their feet go out as evangelists.  It refers to a future day, “How beautiful...  are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace”. 

  Well, you come to the doorpost in chapter 53 - the door-post.  It is the spirit of repentance - repentance of God's people by-and-by.  How deep is the repentance when you love God; you love everybody when you love God.  There is the substitionary part, that in which we all rejoice.  He was wounded for our transgressions, chastised for our peace-we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on Him the iniquity of us all.

  That is the substitutionary part of Isaiah 53.  The door
-post is there.
  The next part is, “He was cut off”.  It is that part which the eunuch was reading; he was not reading the substitutionary part.  “Who shall declare his generation?”  That is a deeper thing; that is what he was reading; he says, “Of whom 
speaketh the prophet? of himself? or of some other?”  Did you ever have the feeling of what it was for Jesus to be cut off and have nothing?  “Who shall declare his generation?”  “He was cut off out of the land of the living”.  That is the most wonderful part of it.  “It pleased 
the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief”.  The heart is bowed before such a thing as that; it is the door-post that will keep our hearts soft; that will keep us lowly in our spirits - that door-post.

  How beautifully it closes.  He bore their iniquities that they might be a righteous people.  He teaches them how to be righteous.  I appeal to you.  Why did Jesus bear our sins? You know He bore them, you are glad to be free, glad to remember that He bore them.  He bore your sins to make you a righteous person.  Do you like that?  “Who his own self bare our sins in his own body
 on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness”.  That is it.  He went to the door-post to secure a righteous people for Jehovah's pleasure; a people that should answer to Himself morally.

  It thrills my heart to sing that hymn,
  That we as like Thee might become, 
  As we unlike had been. 
  Do you like that?  
‘As we unlike’.  How unlike?  The nearer you get to Christ, the more you touch His moral beauties, the more you are made to feel how unlike you have been; but you will be made to feel that you shall be like Him; to be righteous as He is righteous, to come under His influence that there may be produced in us His own blessed features, whether in service or whether we learn, it is all of Christ we learn.  So may we be kept under the influence of His blessed love that He may teach us to be righteous.

  I feel how poorly I have presented it to you, but my resource is in the Lord that He will give some touch to your hearts on some of these things that may be for profit and blessing for His name’s sake.
_____________________
  

THE SOWER AS PRESENTED IN MARK'S GOSPEL
Mark 3: 31-35; 4: 1-29
  I have read this scripture with a good deal of exercise.  It is simple enough to present to you what will interest, but the point is to give that which is necessary and needful for the moment.  That is where the exercise comes in.  I have on previous occasions brought before you, in the first instance, the features of the man of God and the sensibilities of the man of God; that was my first subject, and last week I brought before you the servant of God.  I endeavoured to shew you the features of the true servant of God, and we traced it through.  We were chiefly occupied with Isaiah 53  in connection with that subject.

  Now this evening I want to bring before you the sower.  It may not be a joyful subject exactly, but it is a very important one.  I hope you will follow me in what I am about to say in regard to it.  I feel deeply impressed with the importance of the subject, because we are living in very superficial days and I think there is a call to reality.  If I know the movement of the Spirit at all there is a great call to be real.  The times are so serious, things are so working up that we must be serious.

  My point has been in my previous addresses to shew you the necessity of intense individuality in a day like this.  I have called attention to the advice that was given by a beloved servant of Christ when he was dying, to a personal friend of his; his last dying advice to him was, 
‘Be intensely individual’.  You cannot go down in a current - I beg your attention to this - you must be intensely individual.  The character of the times demands intense individuality.  You cannot go swimming down a current with other people and think you are right; outwardly you may be, but there is such a thing as personal history with God, real soul history, and if you have not that, then I do not know where you are.  I do not want to cast you on yourself, but on the grace of God.

  In taking up the sower I think I may say  speaking as one who has been in the gospel for a good many years - that we have very much neglected the parable of the sower.  Everybody should pay attention to it because the neglect of it has been disastrous.  It is a most important thing to see what this sowing means
 - exceedingly important.
  Now the subject is a large one, but you will observe that in the three synoptic gospels the parable of the sower is presented, and it is always seen in its own connection.  In the Gospel of Matthew it is connected with administration.  The Lord disclaimed anything that is natural; He refuses what is natural.  That is, He says in each case that these are His brethren - My brother, My sister, My mother - those who do the will of My Father who is in heaven.  That is the way it is put in Matthew.  Here it is the same thing, only it is not the Father in heaven, but he that does the will of God, those are the people that God recognises; He will not recognise any one else.  They are the people who do the will of God.

  In the previous part of chapter 3 the leaders of the nation said He was a blasphemer, and His own friends - His own relations after the flesh - said He was mad, and this is what precedes it.  Here we find the Lord, who has with Him the twelve disciples who surround Him - He is surrounded by those who are listeners, those who hearken to Him, those who are attracted to Him and hearken to Him - and His brethren are without, and they say to Him,  
‘Your mother is without’.  Then He looks round on His people - we are around Him this evening, I trust, through grace we are within that circle; once we were without, but now we are within, we are listeners, we are Christians - He looks around and says, 
‘These are my brethren, those who do the will of God’.  That is how it is put here.

  One other distinction I should like to make.  You must remember that in each gospel the parable is presented according to the line of each gospel.  In Matthew it is dispensational, but here it has its own peculiar setting.  In Mark’s gospel, as in Luke's, it has a deep moral setting.  Here it is presented in connection with Christ as the perfect Servant, the Son of God.  It is very blessed in Mark, that the man who broke down in service, after he was restored was used by the Spirit to speak of the Lord in the way in which he had failed - and I think I can read between the lines - if I may be allowed to express it - his pen is tremulous as he writes with his own deep feeling; he is glad to write about the Lord in the way that he had failed.  The Lord never condones failure; He is above all our failure and promotes our spiritual welfare through failure; so that when we are restored we have a deeper appreciation of Christ.

  I think I can see Mark's appreciation of Christ as he presents Him in the character in which he has failed.  Just like Peter, who was conscious of abundant mercy.  It is very sweet to get the feelings of the writers as it 
is presented in scripture, and the Spirit can give you the sense of that; it cannot be explained in the letter, but the Spirit will give you the sense of it.  If I am reading the gospels I want not only to understand what the words mean, but I want the tone of voice in which He said it, and the Spirit can give it me.  That is spiritual advancement; not only to be able to explain what He is saying, but as He utters those things the Spirit can give you the sense in your soul of the way in which He said them.

  Mark writes in appreciation of Christ; he is glad to write; he has been.  restored and he can write it.  One's heart is touched when the man is restored
 - it is a very great thing to remember that in restoration there is real, positive advancement.
  Well now, he presents the Lord here as the Servant; the Lord is the Servant, the Son of God.  He is God; He is in touch with heaven; He is in conscious Sonship; and He is victorious over Satan.  Those are the qualities which mark the Lord.  That is what we want, to be in keeping really with what we say.  The blessed Lord went into the synagogue - as presented in Mark - and the moment He goes there where the scriptures are read every sabbath, there is a moral power brought in which exposes the condition of the man who 
is there. Reading the scripture did not expose it, but the presence of the Lord exposed it. We need power to be morally identified with what we say; that is what, exercise does. I do not want only to say true things, but I want, to be morally in the power of it.  

  We say things that are true - absolutely true - but there is a lack of force in what we say because we are not in keeping with what we say. This has come home to me with peculiar force and I take it to myself. There He was, morally with God; He was entitled to be there; He was in conscious Sonship - “My beloved Son” - He was victorious over Satan. So must it be. He calls those disciples: Peter, you come, and John, you come; follow Me and I will teach you how to serve.
  Remember this, you must follow the Lord in order to know how to serye. Peter left his fishing to be a fisher of men, and John left his father, and their avocations marked their service afterward. That is very important to remember. Peter was a fisherman; John was not exactly a fisherman, his father was a smack-owner and he was socially in advance of Peter. John was the man who maintains communion. You have Peter and John going together; they were very fond of each other, but they were entirely opposite men in their characters. John keeps your nets mended so that your service bears the constant marks of communion.
  In Mark there is the sphere of service and the style of His service.  Sweet it is to read it.  There was a special touch about His service in Mark.  It gives you the style of the Lord and the way He did things.  What marked His style was deep sympathy; He felt it all.  There was a wonderful touch; He was marked by divine compassion.  How I would like to preach the gospel, not only in clearness doctrinally, but in the power of divine compassion.  That is the thought.  We are often lacking in it.  It is the Spirit of Christ that we want in our service; the mere exposition of things, clearly putting it before a man, effects nothing; but the true servant is marked by compassion.

  Now as the Servant He is the Sower.  He went out to sow, and the sowing is to produce a nation for God's pleasure; the effect of the sowing is that there should be something for God down here.  The reason why you have been made the recipients of the grace of God is this, that you should be for God's pleasure down here in this world.  I beg your attention to it.  That is the way to be happy; if you are here for God's pleasure you are a happy Christian, to do the will of God; to be found down here in the way of God's will is what the sowing produces in people; that there should be those moral features which are well pleasing to God.  Are you here to make a fortune, to make yourself comfortable in your latter days?  No, you are not here for that.  Rouse up and see what you are here for.  He will take care of you; He has numbered the hairs of your head and He will look after you; you are not here to make yourself comfortable, but to be for the pleasure of God; and just in the measure in which you are here for God lies the measure of your happiness.

  I have said here before that no one in the early days of the gospel ever said to any audience that if they believed the gospel they would go to heaven.  There is no such mere proposal in it.  What then is the nature of the proposal? That people should know God, and that they should know Him in such a way that it will constitute their happiness here - the knowledge of God.

  The sower went forth to sow, and this sowing was to produce a generation for God's pleasure.  The action is - He gets into the boat.  There are peculiar features in Mark; He is “in the house”, “in the boat”, “in the way”; all these are straws - if I may use the expression - which 
shew the way the wind blows in Mark.  Pay attention to these little things.  He goes up by the sea, He sits in a boat, and then He says, “Hearken”.  I cannot go into details, it is too great, but what I want to shew you is what the sowing really is.  The Sower sows the word, and the word is the revelation of God.  The second point is the reception
 - that is a large subject  the way in which this word is received.  The next point is the realisation; that is, where it is properly received there is a blessed realisation in the heart; that is, it is vital in you.

  Then fourthly, there is what I should call reflection - God reflected - that is, where the word is known in the soul there is light for other people; light, not in speaking exactly but in living; and then fifthly, the administration - I will shew you what that means directly.  If I may set it out on those five pegs you will follow it better.

  First, the word - the revelation; secondly, the reception; thirdly, the realisation in a true reception; fourthly, that it becomes light for other people; and then fifthly, the communication of it in the power of divine love.  You see what a large subject it is.  We will now proceed.

  The first point is, the word is sown; and remember, in this precious part of Scripture  again I call attention to it - the One who sows is the One who reaps.  There is no question of preaching here, but it is the thought that He who is the Sower becomes the Reaper at the end.  The word was sown when He was here; it has remained here in all its vitality up till now, otherwise where should we be; the word has been maintained here in spite of all the efforts of Satan to crush the testimony.  It is here tonight; what a wonderful miracle!  The word sown by the Lord has reached us in its vitality or we should not be here as Christians.

  He who is the Sower and He who sows the word according to Mark, is the One who will reap.  In that way it is put as the one who sows and falls asleep, and then by-and-by he will come back and reap it.  He went forth to sow.  He wept.  What divine sympathy.  No mere doctrine, no mere unfolding of doctrine.  He wept.  Think of the Sower.  He wept.  What made Him weep?  The hardness of men's hearts.

  They refused the blessing, refused the knowledge of God, and He wept; but He shall doubtless come again rejoicing; He who wept shall come back rejoicing because there will be marvellous fruits.  Here we are, all of us, what an occasion of joy to Him; He will come back and reap the 
fruit of what He has sown.  Do not put preaching in here; it is the quality of the word itself and the vitality of it.  I beg you to think of it.  The word sown by the Lord is vital, it reproduces itself; it has gone on producing in a perfectly marvellous way, and He who sows becomes the Reaper at the end.

  Now what is this word - the word of grace?  It is God revealed in His attributes and His nature.  That is the word.  He Himself was the expression of it.  He is the Word.  He is the Sower and the Word - God revealed in His attributes.  What is the subsequent part of it? the suffering part of the revelation?  There was no relief.  I may allude to it in the next chapter where the relief is found.  It is the deliverance of certain people in conditions which mark the next chapter.  There was the man under the power of Satan; there was the woman defiled by sin; and the child in the deadly grip of death.  These people all needed deliverance, but here it is not deliverance, it is revelation.  He is revealed.  Hence chapter 5 immediately follows, both here and in Luke's gospel.  The moment you get the parable of the Sower you get these narratives which set forth the conditions in which the people were in whose hearts the word was sown.

  You have the cleansing of sin; we have had to be delivered from the power of death; that is the deliverance, and we appreciate that side.
  One of the most fascinating chapters in the Bible to me is Mark 5.  I could preach from it all the year round and never exhaust it.  The way it is put gives a wonderful idea of the Son of God as the Deliverer from Satan, from sin and from death.  The Sower is a more blessed side, more positive; the sowing is the word, the word which brings God in.

  What has the gospel done for you?  Has it revealed God to you? Never mind about going to heaven, all that is self.  If we make that a point we are never sure of it.  If you get over to God 's side of things you are sure of your side.  If we move in the circle of our own need we are never quite sure of having our need met; but the moment we get into God's side of things we are sure of our need being met.

  If you had said to Mary, ‘Are you forgiven?’ and she had said, ‘Yes’.  
‘How do you know?’ ‘I know the Lord who has done it.  I am sure of my forgiveness because I know the One who has forgiven me.  That is where my assurance lies - I know God
’.  
The Word is the revelation of God and is sown in our hearts.  How blessed it is to know God.  He has sown the 
seed.  I cannot go into details, but I draw a contrast between those who anon with joy received it, and I want to shew the difference between natural sentiment and divine sentiment.

  A little remark here before I proceed.  The moment the seed was sown, then came the devil.  What drew him?  The word of God.  What for?  To nullify it; to destroy it.  He is the enemy of God, and his efforts are always to frustrate the purpose of God.  Then came the devil.  What drew him?  The word.  What for?  To destroy it; to destroy its influence; to destroy its vitality.

  Then there was the reception - anon with joy.  I have had some experience in this matter and I am pretty wary when people are very jubilant and very joyful; they rejoice in the proposal, who would not rejoice in the proposal of going to heaven, of being saved for heaven; I want to be in the place of happiness which is the nature of the proposal; there is a kind of rejoicing in the proposal.

  It is accepted, but there was no divine work; it fell on stony ground and there was very little earth, very little subjective work.  Many times have I seen it, those who have confessed Christ so joyfully; I have had to sit down in my sorrow and see how easily it has been given up when the test came.  My brethren, pay attention to the Sower, I beg of you.  It will give you wisdom and discernment.  I wish I had known this about forty years ago.  I look back and see those who anon with joy received it.

  What do you expect in your children?  I should look in my children for conscience.  How easy it is for the dear children to speak of Jesus, but that is not a proof of divine work.  You see a tender conscience, and often there is a restlessness in children who are under the Spirit·, and we misunderstand it.  No one ever was or could be taught to love Christ apart from righteousness; much forgiveness, much love.  We must not confuse this with sentiment.

  The first experience of the seed falling into good ground is a painful experience, because it exposes you.  If the word brings the knowledge of God there is deepest exposure; you go down with deep pain; but if you go down through the pain of self-knowledge, it is that you may find that the good that is in God is greater than the evil that is in you.  What a joyful thing - true, deep joy in the knowledge of God.

  I have to learn the evil that is in me, and it is a painful experience, but it ends in the wonderful gladness of finding that God is better and greater than the evil in me - that blessed God.  You may overcome evil with good, but I must learn the evil that is within myself, in the very nature of things.  Then a deep joy, the heart wells up - broken and humbled, oh! so humbled - to find God.  I find Him in the midst of my wretchedness, and the goodness in God is greater than the evil I find in myself.

  There is the joy - deep, true joy of finding God.  So I ask you, I do not merely say, Are you resting on a text of scripture? but, have you got in your heart the gladness, the true, solid gladness, of knowing God?

  When the apostle wrote to young converts in the early days - three months only converted - the Epistle to the Thessalonians, he said, “You turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God; and to wait for his Son from heaven”.  He did not say, 
‘You are justified’.  He said, “You turned to God”.  God was presented in the gospel and they turned to God from idols.  To  from.  Not from - to, but to God from idols.  You cannot turn from anything, you must turn to first and then you turn from.  You turn to God to serve the living and true God and to wait for His Son from heaven.

  What fine moral power is in that.  That is where we are so defective, all of us.  What accounts for much of the disaster that we have to deplore is the defective knowledge of the gospel, making the gospel an accommodation for ourselves, that is where the moral lack is surely.

  If you are prudential people you will want your children to do well now and in the future.  Perfectly natural; you like to secure them for the present and for the future, and have pleasure in the thought that you will all be in heaven by-and-by.  I ask you, What is there in that for God?  I call your attention to it.  The Sower sowed the seed that there might be a people down here for the pleasure of God - His own generation.  Well now, has that been realised?  That is, realising the word there will come in us a gradual deepening and progressing into it; that is, there is life, and so there is light for others.  Life in you becomes light for other people.

  We may think if people come to our meeting rooms that they are in the position to believe our testimony.  That is a poor thing.  The testimony lies in vitality, nowhere else.  In vitality.  You may have people in the position without the condition.  It is common enough for people to take 
the position, but are you satisfied with the position?  I would not be satisfied with anything less than a condition which is in keeping with the position.  That is the testimony, so that there shall be light for other people to see.

  Philippians 2 says, “It is God twhich worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure”.  God working efficaciously in you, presenting Himself to you, and working by the Spirit that which answers to Himself, to His nature and His character, so that we become children; in the midst of a perverse nation we are found in the way of God's will.

  Let me put it in a very simple way thus  Everything I think of God - I speak with reverence - I am, I will, I do.  That is, I am, that is His being.  I am.  I am love.  God is Love.  I am, and because I am, I will and I do.  Behind the will of God is love, always love.  Get hold of that;  love is His being.  Therefore He wills and He does.  Now follow me, that is the way for us, do not you see? It is the being that we want to be exercised about.  Your growth in the divine nature, 
in the knowledge of God, is your true spiritual stature.  
‘I am’, ‘I will’, ‘I do’.
  We are constantly thinking about the doing, but we need to be exercised about the ‘I am’, the being; that is, you take in in your soul what God is.  The word is already there, or you would not be a Christian, but the
re is a growing appreciation, and so there is the willing and doing of His good pleasure.
  Now I want to call your attention to the administration in verse 21.  He speaks of the candlestick and says, “Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed? and not to be set on a candlestick?”  It is not to be hidden by either.  A bushel is selfgratification.  People go on to the line of gratifying themselves.  I ask you not to resent it - I am coming to the close of my story down here - take it from the Lord; is your bushel claiming you? or your bed?  Do you know what you are left here for?  We are down here to set forth God.

  How are people going to know God if they do not know Him through His people?  The angels might be envious of us - it is a most wonderful thing to be here for God.  There must be a realisation in your soul of what God is before there can be an outgoing of light.

  I come now to the next point.  “Take heed what ye hear: with what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you: and unto you that hear 
shall more be given.  For he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he hath”. 

  Now I will tell you what that means.  Whatever you receive from God produces a feeling 
in your heart of desire to give it to others; you cannot possibly receive any blessing from God without its creating this desire in your heart, that others in like manner should receive it.  It produces that divine feeling - the same feeling that God had in giving it to you is reproduced in your heart and you want to give it to others.  That is the extraordinary part of it.  The principle of it is this, the more you give the more you get.  Do you think that God has given us light for ourselves?  No; He has given us light to diffuse to others, and the moment you stop you lose what you have.  If you are not active in divine love, in desire that others should be the  recipients of it, you may depend upon it you will lose it.  That is a most important thing.  That is the administration of it.

  One other thing I would like to say.  The blessed Lord said to His disciples later on, “Let us 
pass over to the other side”.  A gracious invitation, “Let us 
pass over to the other side”.  
‘Let us go’.  What does that mean? What does the other side mean? The world to come where all these principles will be publicly displayed.  “Let us 
pass over to the other side”.  We belong to that other world where all these principles that have come to us shall be in full display.

  How the heart longs for a world that will answer to God.  How one's heart gets pained by the confusion that is here.  If we lived nearer to God we would feel it more, we would have the pleasure of God sensibly in us because we felt as He felt.  We are too much at home with the will of man and the self-gratification of man.  If we were nearer to God and under the power of the testimony we should feel things.  We should be growingly sensitive as to what is contrary to God.  “Let us 
pass over to the other side”. 
  He has taken us to the other side.  “They took him as he was in the ship”.  They took Him as He was.  Why?  The testimony was there.  I wish I were beginning now, I could say more about it, but they took Him as He was in the ship.  He was the
 rejected One, but He was the One who was for God's pleasure.  The testimony was in Him - the Son of God.  As the apostle could speak of it in his line of things in Corinthians; they had accused him of vacillation, but he turned to his testimony, he did not defend himself; he was so engrossed with Christ he did not care about 
himself, but says, We preached to you the Son of God; “in him are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God”.  They took Him as He was in the ship.  In Him is the yea and in Him the Amen - it is the triumph of God
 - it cannot be defeated.  I want to be in the ship where He is as to the testimony of God.

  The devil blew with his winds, he would sink that ship where the testimony was.  That is what he was doing; he would bring all his power to bear upon that which holds the testimony, but that ship could not sink for Jesus was there.  Sometimes you feel the waves will come up and overwhelm us
 - what will become of the testimony? No power on earth or in heaven can sink the ship where Jesus is.  I want to be where He is as the testimony of God.  In Him is the yea and in Him is the Amen.  Everything is established in His blessed Person.  Let us keep close to Him then.

  They say, “Do you not care?” 
  He cares.  He thinks of us constantly; we are never out of His thoughts  -never.  That which is dear to Him on the earth  and we are never out of His thinkings not for a single second.  No ship can sink where He is.  So He goes to the other side.

  I trust that what I have said may be of help to you.  I feel that to my own soul it is very beautiful, but my presentation of it is poor, but the Spirit of God can make it good to you and I trust He will, so that there may be some moral result.  I ask you again to consider what a wonderful thing it is to be down here for God's pleasure, and that which is for God's pleasure becomes testimony for men.  What God finds pleasure in becomes testimony to men.

______________________
  Before any go, I would like to say this: I have had very considerable exercise in regard to these meetings.  I have delivered the three subjects which I feel the Lord brought before me as the result of my exercise, and since I have been here I have been very exercised and I have to say this, that I greatly desire to preach the gospel in this hall next Friday.  I will tell you why I have had exercise.  There are a great many people around us who are exercised; if we were nearer to God we should find them out.  They are exercised as to their relationship to God and they want the gospel.

  I was away in the country a while back  I say it for encouragement - and we had some very good meetings, and I suggested that we might have a gospel meeting on the Friday.  It was a sort of experiment, if I may use the word; but the place was crowded; far more came to hear the gospel on Friday than on the Lord’s day.  A great many people are prejudiced, but they will come to a place like this.  I hope I have the sympathy and prayers of all here.

____________________

READING AT PARKSTONE
THE LAST MINISTRY TO THE SAINTS OF OUR LATE BELOVED BROTHER, 
W. JOHNSON
Philippians 1
He suggested reading Philippians, as following Ephesians, which we had just finished.
  This is not a doctrinal epistle, but experimental, and the writer was a living expression of the truth he brought forward: “For me to live is Christ”.  (
v 21) Therefore, he does not address himself to them as an apostle, nor does he address them as an assembly as such, although recognising assembly order, but links himself up with Timotheus, as “servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons”.  Paul is like a class leader, giving his experience to help and encourage the saints.

  It is important to see that in all Paul's epistles he addresses himself to state, always touching the weak spot. (Chap. 4: 2)  But before the defect is mentioned there is the ministry to meet it.

  Hence it is most helpful to see the structure of the epistle.  Chapter 1 is introductory: chapter 2, one love, one will, which delivers you from the will of man.  In chapter 3 the glory of Christ eclipses the glory of man: and in chapter 4 you are superior to all circumstances down here, rejoicing in the knowledge of God's care over you - which is present salvation.

  In the Epistle to the Thessalonians; you get the May-day  or spring-time  of  Christianity.
  
But here you get the autumn, when the mature fruit is in evidence.  (v 11)

  Speaking of verse 11, a sister asked a few days ago what righteousness was.  I referred her to John 7: 18: “He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory: but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him
”.  Therefore, if I glorify myself, I rob God of His glory, and I am not righteous.  The first act of righteousness is to own that I have none.

  Special attention should be given to the prayer in verses 9-11, which embraces the whole scope of Christianity.  
You will find in the epistles there are more prayers for  the  saints who are in a good state than for those who are in a bad state.  

  The apostle was encouraged to pray for them on account of their spiritual prosperity.  A prosperous state
 naturally is most dangerous, and such need our special prayers.  How often do we pray for the saints who are going on, that their love may abound more and more
.  
We are too often occupied with failure and weakness, and saints in poor circumstances.  But how many brothers who have been going on well for years, and who are open especially to the attacks of the enemy, have become shipwrecks before they finished their journey?  The apostle's desire is for them to continue sincere and without offence till the day of Christ, which is the display of His glory, when the whole earth will be under His beneficent influence as Head.  The Philippians being in the light and present enjoyment of this, brought them into conflict, and the conflict is the confirmation of the gospel.  (v 7)

  We are inclined to act on prudential lines, and to consider for our own safety.  Paul was a prisoner at Rome, over a thousand miles from Philippi, and at the time when Nero was casting two and three hundred saints a day to the wild beasts.
  
Notwithstanding  this,  the  Philippians did not content themselves with merely meeting in a room to pray for the apostle, but sent Epaphroditus, who, at the risk of his own life, conveyed comforts to the prisoner at Rome.  They were not fearful, shutting themselves up in a room, but came out into the open to meet the necessity of the apostle, thereby bringing themselves into conflict.  Suffering was to them a part of Christian privilege.  (v 29)

  Ephesians prepares you for the conflict, for which you require the whole panoply of God.  Philippians gives you proper Christian  state.  In all the epistles is found a model brother, and in this epistle Epaphroditus is held up as one.

  Beloved brethren, doctrine is not enough, important as it is, but what matters is life and vitality.  “For me to live is Christ”, which brings to mind an incident in connection with G. V. W. when travelling from Australia to New Zealand in company with Captain S.  They had just left the boat when Mr W-- turned round and said, 
‘I've left my Greek Testament in my cabin, underneath the pillow’.  
The captain immediately turned back to fetch it, and asked the officer in charge whether he had seen a Greek Testament belonging to Mr W-.  He said 
‘Yes’, and  remarked,  
‘There  never has been a man on board like him
’.  
‘Why?’ asked the captain, ‘Did he have anything to say?’ He replied, ‘not much, but he was just like Jesus’.  That is testimony.
  
We often hear the preaching of the gospel, and holding meetings in a room like this, spoken of as testimony.  Testimony lies in vitality, not merely in what we say.  What precedes the expression of life is the enjoyment of it.

  Paul trusted that in answer to their  prayers he might be released from prison, in order to visit them again; that was far better than writing a letter, but the longing desire to depart and be with Christ was very great with him, nevertheless to abide in the flesh was more needful for them, and he had confidence that for their sakes he would be preserved.

* * * * *
  One of the last remarks made by our beloved brother was, ‘I am going  to  heaven because love wants me there
’. 
_________________
  From ‘Mutual Comfort’, 1921
  
  
  

PARDON, SALVATION, AND PEACE
Ten addresses published in booklet form. 
These are taken from the 7th edition of the booklet and are not dated. 
CONVICTED, CLEANSED, CLOTHED, CROWNED AND COUNSELLED
Zechariah 2: 13; 3: 1-10
  It is easy to see that this scripture has an application to a later day.  My object now is not to interpret, but to
 preach the gospel from it; only I just say in passing that it is the way God will in the future bring back His people Israel, and then the last verses I read will have their proper fulfilment.  That is the true interpretation of it; but I also find here the principles upon which God in grace deals with sinners now as well as then.
      

  Now let us look for a moment at the verse with which I began: “Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord: for he is raised up out of his holy habitation”.  Have you ever been present in a law-court?  Some poor creature is there, it may be, charged with murder.  A
 great deal of curiosity is shown, there is a crowded court.  The greater the crime the greater the crowd: nothing shows our depraved taste more than this.  There is a hum of voices; all are curious to see the poor prisoner, and are discussing the case.  Suddenly a little door opens and the clerk of the court cries with a loud voice: 
‘Silence!’  There is a hush at once.  What has happened?  The judge has entered the court and taken his seat.  So here in our scripture: silence is called before the Lord.  He takes His place as Judge.

  Our attention is next called to the prisoner.  “And he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the Lord”.  He is standing in the dock.  It is a great thing to take your place in the dock.
  
You will have to one day if you do not now.  You may evade the thought, endeavour to forget God and shut your eyes to the fact, but in spite of that the day is fast approaching when you will have to face God.  The throne of God holds you responsible for what you have done.  You must have to do with God then; why not have to do with Him now?  May you have grace given you to go into the dock, and it shall be for you the dawning of an eternal day.  Joshua the high priest stands at the bar.  
It will be a solemn thing to stand before that awful tribunal, the great white throne.  The heaven and the earth flee before the face of Him that sits on it.  Solemn moment!  Sinner, how will you stand?  Thank God, 
I shall never stand there, because I have already taken my place in the dock by the side of Joshua.  God give you to do the same even now, before it is too late.  John says, “I saw ... and the books were opened”.  Man, you live in sin and forget that God has got His ledger.  What about all that black list down against your name?  God will be God.  He will maintain the dignity of His throne.  I will show you presently how God can maintain the dignity of His throne and yet save the sinner.  “Another book was opened, which is the book of life”.  There are two books, the book of deeds and the book of life.  Professors may put their names in the book of life, but God will blot out the names of those who have not stood in the dock with Joshua.  You may put down your name because it is respectable to do so, but it will not stand.  There is the book of responsibility as well as the book of life.  Mere profession will not do.  If you have not life, your name will be blotted out of the book of life
5.  You may resist God now, but He will bring you out of your grave and you will stand before Him at that terrible tribunal, and what will you do then?  If you take your stand here with Joshua, you will anticipate morally that great white throne, and never have to stand before it.

  We have seen the Judge and the prisoner at the bar; and now there is another thing, “Satan standing at his right hand to resist him”.  When God works you always find Satan busy.  Satan is there to turn him away from God, and more, he is there to accuse him.  The man is guilty, and he is speechless.  What can be done for him?  I pursue the illustration of the law-court.  The day passes on, the witnesses are called, the case is thoroughly investigated, all that can be said for and against is said, and the judge has summed all up, and now the jury retire to consider their verdict.  The prisoner looks at those men as they file off, for he knows his fate is in their hands.  In the court the hum of voices is again heard, for the judge also has retired for a moment.  Some are speculating as to what the verdict will be; some are even betting on it; all are waiting to know.  At length the door opens and the jurymen appear.  The judge resumes his seat.  The clerk again calls, 
‘Silence!’  The jurymen have come to a decision.  The prisoner looks at those men anxiously.  There is silence; not a voice is heard.  The clerk says, 
‘Gentlemen of the jury, what say you?  Guilty or not guilty?
’  How the poor prisoner stretches forward to 
catch the answer!  
‘Guilty!’ is the reply that settles his fate.  The judge draws on the black cap and passes sentence, and the poor man is led away to await its execution.  Solemn scene, but a feeble picture of what it shall be for the Christless soul in the day of judgment.  Sinner, will you come into the dock 
now?  Will you take your place before God saying, I am guilty?  If so, it shall be the dawn of an eternal day for you.  Do you ask, Can I take that place?  Yes, though God be holy, that throne is favourable to you.  It will not be in the day that is coming.  I will tell you why it is favourable to you now.  It is because all its claims have been met by the blood of Jesus, and God can say, “The Lord  rebuke  thee,  O  Satan: ... is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?”  The eternal burning - think of it, who can pluck you out of that?  God Himself can do it.  He can deliver your soul because He has found a ransom.  He has found that in the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, and it meets the claims of the throne in respect 
of any poor sinner who takes the place of a guilty one.
  There were two men in America who had been brought up together; one got on in the world and rose, and the other went down.  The one eventually became a judge, and the other a criminal at his bar.  Their original connection was well known, and the court was crowded with people curious to see how the judge would treat his former friend.  The case was gone into and the jury returned a verdict of 
‘Guilty’, and the judge inflicted the heaviest fine possible, an immense sum of money, or else imprisonment.  People whispered, 
‘What a shame!’  They thought of their early days.  But the case was not ended.  Having pronounced the sentence, the judge stepped down from the bench, and coming to where the criminal was, said, 
‘I remember our early days, how we were brought up together, and I have come down to pay the heavy fine I have inflicted; the prisoner may go free’.  It was an easy matter for that judge to pay the fine; but in order that we might be cleansed, the blessed Saviour had to come down here and pay the debt in 
blood, and thus He has turned that throne of judgment into a throne of grace.
  “Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?”  How can you be plucked out of the fire?  God says, as it were, My Son has been into the fire.  Ah! dear soul, it is only because Jesus has been into the fire, that God can pluck thee as a brand out of the fire. 

  The first thing I see about Joshua is that he is convicted.  
The next thing is, he is cleansed.  
I come now to the cleansing.  “Take away the 
filthy garments from him”.  
You cannot take away filthy garments from a sinner, but God can.  
He can cleanse our sins.  To the one who takes his place by the side of Joshua - to 
you if you take this place - come the words, “I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee”.  My reader, has He cleansed you?  Has He caused your iniquity to pass from you?  He will do it now if you take your true place.  In that awful moment when Jesus hung upon the cross, God caused our iniquity to pass on Him, and thus He can cause it to pass from us who believe.  If He does not cause it to pass 
from thee now, He will cause it to pass on thee in that terrible day that is coming, and thou wilt be placed with all thy sins on thee in the lake of fire  that  awful burning.  But, oh!  He desires to snatch thee as a brand from the burning: “The Lord ... is longsuffering to us-ward, 
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance “ (2 Peter 3: 9).
  But you must stand where the fire has been.  You have heard, no doubt, how that out in the far west of America,  in the prairies, where the grass grows long, it gets very dry in the summer and readily catches fire.  It is a terrible thing when it happens, for it rushes on as fast as a horse can gallop, overtaking everything that lies in the way, and men and animals flee for their lives.  The only way of safety is to burn away a huge space around before the fire reaches you, and then to stand in that blackened spot.  When the wave of fire comes up it has nothing to burn.  Stand then, dear soul, where the fire has been.  The cross is the place where the fire has been.  Will you stand there?  That is where the preacher stands.  Own your guilt and stand there.  You may know all about this, but you have not, it may be, 
taken your stand there yet.  Take your stand there and hear the words, 
“Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee”.
  Have you taken your stand there, and yet are troubled about your sins?  Let this word take every troubled thought out of your heart.  God has laid on Jesus the iniquity of us all.  From the throne that word comes.  Stand back, Satan!  Thou canst not say that God is unrighteous in doing this; on the contrary, He is perfectly righteous, and the blood of Jesus is the witness of it.

  Well, that is the cleansing: now I come to the clothing: “I will clothe thee with change of raiment”.  He has caused our iniquities to pass away in the death of Christ.  Sins and sin, gone for God in the burning.  But that is not all; we are clothed.  What is that?  We are 
in Christ, “made the righteousness of God in him”.  “Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him”.  That is what Christ is to God; can you be more complete, more beautiful?  Covered all over with Christ, you are thus made suitable to God.  God makes you suitable to Himself.  Can you better that?

  What said the king when he came in and found the man without the wedding garment?  You know the story.  A wedding garment was provided for each guest, as was the custom in that country.  I think I see that man as he comes into the hall.  There hang all the wedding garments;  he looks at them and then at his own coat, and he says, I think this will do.  What will do?  It is like your saying, I am a temperate, church-going man.  I never cheat any one, I pay my way.  There is no clothing for you in that.  That will 
not do.  
Our first parents found that out.  
They found that a covering of their own providing left them naked in the presence of God.  Well, the man goes in without the garment, and presently the king comes in and looks round on that festive scene with an eye that nothing can escape.  The king's eyes rest on him; he has dishonoured the king and he has dishonoured  the king's son, and the king says to him, “Friend, how 
camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment?  And he was speechless.  Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth”.
  
He is searched, silenced, and sentenced.  Nothing but Christ will do for God; if you are not clothed with Christ, God will search you out and there will be no escape.

  “Let them set a fair mitre upon his head”.  He is 
crowned.  
They put a mitre of fine linen on the priests in Exodus 39, and on the mitre a plate of gold on which was engraved “Holiness to the Lord”.  So we are made priests to God.  Every Christian is a priest.  Many do not think so; their idea is that only a certain class are priests.  But Peter says in his first epistle, chapter 2, that we are a “holy priesthood” and a “royal priesthood”.  We are priests to worship God, brought from being 
prisoners in the dock to be priests to God.  Look at that! made a priest to praise Him for ever.

  The next thing is that he is counselled.  
This comes last.  God does everything first.  When you know what it is to be convicted, cleansed, clothed, and crowned, God will speak to you about your ways.  See what He says: “If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge, then thou shalt also judge my house”, 
&c.  And again, “Hear now, O 
Joshua the high priest, thou, and thy fellows that sit before thee; for they are men wondered at”.  
Who are the men wondered at?  Those who are washed from their sins, clothed with Christ, and crowned as priests.  Men wonder at or observe them.  When a man is cleansed, clothed, and crowned, he shows it in his ways.  God counsels us respecting our ways, and what does He counsel?  To look away to the Stone.  “Behold”, He says, “the stone that I have laid”.  How are you going to walk through this world on to the glory?  You must look away to the Stone.  Keep your eye upon Christ.  “Upon one stone shall be seven eyes”.  The stone is power and the eyes wisdom.  There is the power and wisdom of God in Christ to carry us through this world to the glory of God.  You are left here, dear Christian, to exhibit in your ways the grace that has cleansed, clothed, and crowned you, and you will only do this by looking away to the Stone.  I often think of that verse in Hosea 14: “Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with idols?”  God has met me and blessed me; what have I to do any more with idols? What is an idol?  Anything that keeps you away from God.  Now listen.  God says, “I have heard him and observed him”.  Then Ephraim speaks, “I am like a green fir tree”.  He is turned from idols, he is heard and observed, and is like a green fir tree.  He has made us green fir trees, but where is our fruit to be found?  Another voice is heard, “From me is thy fruit found”.  “Abide in me, and I in you.  As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine, no more can ye
, except ye abide in me”.  “He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit”.  In proportion as we look away to Christ, so will our ways be pleasing to God.  There is perfect power and perfect wisdom there.  “Behold the stone that I have laid before Joshua; upon one stone shall be seven eyes”.  God grant that we may look away to Christ!

  And now, in conclusion, if not yet saved, will you take your place in the dock with Joshua as a convicted sinner?  If you do, you shall be 
cleansed from your sins, clothed with Christ, crowned as a priest to worship God, and counselled by God to walk to His glory.
_____________________

THE  MINISTRY OF RECONCILIATION

2 Corinthians 5
  You cannot read this chapter without being struck with the fact that it is a wonderful thing to be a Christian.  There is a beautiful word at the beginning, “We know”.  There is a fine ring about that word “know”.  We 
know; it is not, we hope.  
And what does the Christian know?  The apostle here is looking at the possibility of death.  “We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God”.  He is not dismayed at the thought of death, he is not afraid; he speaks with confidence about it.  What fills man's heart with fear is the thought of death, the “evil day”, the day of departure from this world.  The poor Christless soul cannot face it, but here is a man who views it without fear, yea, with pleasure.  He says in the previous chapter, “We look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen”.  The difference between a converted and an unconverted man is that the unconverted man is guided by what is 
seen, whilst the converted man is guided by what is not seen.  
A man who looks ahead in this world is praised, because he is thought to be prudent.  But he does not look ahead far enough.  The apostle looked ahead into eternity, and for him it was all gladsome.  Christians have bright prospects there; have you?  When a Christian thinks of eternity, he thinks of that word so dear to an Englishman - Home:
 I understand that you cannot find a word like it in any other language.  It is very impressive.  When I was a sailor, I remember well the feeling I had as we weighed anchor for home.  The ship loaded, all ready, the command given, we are homeward bound.  A thrill of delight passes through the whole ship.  But home has a sweeter thought for me now.  I am going to spend eternity in the Father's house.  That is home for the Christian.  Nearer  home!  What  a  prospect!  Oh,  poor unsaved sinner, dark is thy prospect.  “He that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him”.  The preacher sees out yonder a dark, dark cloud, you see none; he entreats you to wake up to this important matter.

  I turn now to the latter part of the chapter.  
There we read about the ministry of reconciliation.  It sets before us God's attitude towards this poor world.  You need reconciling to God, because, just as the prodigal went away from his father, so have you departed from God.

  In chapter 3 the apostle speaks of another ministry, the ministry of death and condemnation.  God came down upon Mount Sinai and gave Israel ten commandments, which told man what he ought to be.  The first word that sounded out from the mount was, “Thou shalt”.  Even Moses said, “I exceedingly fear and quake”.  There were thunderings and lightnings and a thick cloud.  All that was terrible.  Can you get any hope from that?  You cannot; it can only end in condemnation.  That is not the ministry of reconciliation; it is a ministry of death.

  The ministry of reconciliation began when Christ came into this world.  “God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself”.  He sent His Son into this world to tell out all that was in His heart towards man.  You remember those well-known words in John 3: 16, “God so loved the world”.  The first word of the law was “Thou”, the first word in the ministry of reconciliation is “God”.  “God so loved” - beautiful words!  You have not loved  God,  but God has loved.  He did not 
demand, He loved and He gave, and the one who believes has.
  “God was in Christ”.  It  was the unfolding of the heart of God in this world.  The devil had lied about Him and the woman had listened, and so all the ruin came in.  Christ came to tell men the truth.  Would God keep back the fruit of a tree?  He gave His Son!  The source of it all was the love of God.
  
If you sum up the life of Jesus in one sentence, it is this, “God was in Christ”. Poor sinner, come home to God.  
God is love.
  Let me give you two instances of this.  One you will find in the end of Luke 7.  The Lord is invited by a Pharisee to dinner, and He goes.  As He crosses the threshold He notices that there is no water given Him to wash His feet, there is no kiss of welcome for Him, no oil for the anointing of His head.  He faces it, though He says nothing.  He is not at home there.  But there is a woman away out in the dark slums; she is a sinner; she knows she is a sinner; she is a convicted sinner.  Are you?  Have you a storm raging in your breast?  Are you weary, worn, and sad?  Do you sigh and weep in secret, covering it up from your fellows, but unable to restrain it when alone?  Then will you not keep company with this woman?  Will you come with her to the feet of the Saviour?  There was this about it: she knew Jesus was in the Pharisee's house, she knew the Saviour was there.  The Father drew her and she came.  Will you come in all your deep need?

  I think I see her as she enters that quarter of the town  a very respectable quarter, no doubt.  She comes to the door of the Pharisee’s house, she looks in, she sees  Jesus there.  She heeds not the scornful crowd as she passes in.  She says, There is one spot for me - at His feet.  She stands behind Him weeping.  My blessed Master is lonely no longer, for He came down from heaven for such as she.  She stands and weeps.  He counts her tears.  They could not put her sins away, but inasmuch as they speak of a broken heart He will not despise them.  “God was in Christ”.

  The Pharisee begins to reason; he has no room for grace.  “She is a sinner”, he says.  When we are in the presence of God we turn it this way.  
‘I am a sinner’.  That Holy One could read his heart, and so He says, “Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee.  And he saith, Master, say on”. Are you one of these “say on” folks?  Some of you have been attending the preaching for years.  Say on, say on, is your language, and you are not converted yet.  You have gone away telling people, Oh, it is very nice; I like it much.  Do you know that you are in the devil’s cradle?  He is whispering in your ear that God will be merciful to you at the last.

  “There was a certain creditor” - God - and He had two debtors, thee and thee.  God give you to feel your debt.  There is a difference in the amount of the debts, but one thing is common to both: “they had nothing to pay”, and the creditor “frankly forgave them both”.  “Tell me”, the Lord asks Simon, “which of them will love him most?”  And Simon answers, “I 
suppose that he to whom he forgave most”.  Simon is outside it all.

  Do you say, I feel my prospects are dark and black.  
If I take my place by the side of that poor woman, what will He say to me?  He will say to you what He said to her, “Thy sins are forgiven”. Calvary's cross has made it possible.  He is speaking to you through His word.  It is as true for you as for her.  These words are for thee.  He died to make it possible; the righteous basis of this ministry of reconciliation is laid in His death.

  The other instance I will give you is in John 8.  In the last verse of chapter 7 we read, “And every man went unto his own house”.  Chapter 8: 1: “Jesus went unto the mount of Olives”.  Most expressive: they all had homes to go to; He went to the mountain.  But early in the morning He is found in the temple, and, while teaching, the Scribes and the Pharisees bring unto him a woman taken in adultery, and set her right down before 
Him.  They think they have cornered Him now.  They as good as say, Here she is.  Moses says she ought to be stoned; “but what sayest thou?”  He stoops down and with His finger writes on the ground.  Do you know what that meant?  He says, as it were, Do you not know that I wrote the law? and I am greater than the law I wrote.  They were quoting the law to the One that wrote it.  “When they continued asking him, he lifted up himself
, and said unto them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her”.  The full light is turned on.  He says, I know you, and again He stooped down and wrote on the ground.
  
Did they not know that He had to write the law a second time?  They made a golden calf and worshipped it, and the first writing of the law never came into the camp.  Moses broke the tables at the foot of the mount.  The second tables were placed in the ark, and that was typical of Christ.  These scribes and Pharisees go out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last.  They went out to their religion, to their prayers, their alms and their fasting, but they went out into the dark; and, mark you, religious darkness is the worst darkness.  The Lord turns to the  woman,  “Hath no man condemned thee?  She said, No man, Lord.  And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee; go, and sin no more”.  “God was in Christ  reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them”.

  We get the basis of this ministry in verse 21.  This is how this ministry is made possible.  God is holy, God is love; how can His love reach out to sinners?  “For he hath made him to be sin for us”.  Where did He make Him sin?  On the cross; there that blessed, holy, spotless One was made sin for us.  Come to the cross and you will see how this ministry could be possible.  An almighty barrier existed between you and 
God - sin.  
That barrier must come down.  The devil’s gospel is, “God is love; He is merciful; He will overlook sin”.  Do not listen to that.  God is infinitely holy.  His love cannot reach you unless the question of sin is righteously settled.  Come to the cross, and you will see there how it could be.  What is Jesus saying?  “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?”  If God forsook you, you would be damned for ever.  He forsook His Son that you might not be forsaken.  And why did God forsake His Son?  Because He was made sin.  He was made what I am, and He bore my sins God could not look on Him then.  He was treated as though He had done it all, and that is the reason this message can come to you.  God can show mercy, He can forgive sins, because the whole question has been divinely met.  
That is the basis of the ministry.
  His love brought Him there and my sins brought Him there.  There is nothing you can discover in yourself  but that God has an answer to it in the cross.  There is God’s judgment of it.  I am gone in His death.  “He hath made him to be sin for us, ... that we might be made the righteousness of God in him”.  On the cross He was made what I am, and in the glory I am made what He is.  Did you ever meditate on that?  Sin  is  gone,  everything  is met in His death and He is gone up in glory.
  
By faith we look to the cross and see Him made sin, and then to the glory and see Him there.  

  He went up with uplifted hands.  Do you think His hands have ever gone down?  Never; they are uplifted still.  What were they doing in heaven as He went up?  Methinks I see the angels looking down upon Him as He goes up out of His people’s sight.  He goes up, up.  See those principalities and powers, those ministers of His making way for Him as He goes higher and higher till He sits down on the throne of God.  He sits there having answered to all the claims of that throne when out yonder i
n all the desolation of the cross.  

  You and I, believer,  are made the righteousness of God in Him.  God's eye rests upon Christ.
  
He looks on the face of His Anointed.  Why do you not look there?  There is not a beauty you can discover in Christ that you will not be invested with.  Think of that!  It reminds me of what Paul said to Philemon: “Receive him [Onesimus] as myself”.  I am received as Christ is.  You may say, I find so much in me that is contrary.  Ah!  but God only sees Christ, and when He comes we shall bear His image.  What a beautiful ministry this is!
  
God grant that you may profit by it.
_____________________

LAW AND GRACE
Luke 10: 5-42.
  The Apostle Paul, in writing to the Ephesians, says, “By grace are ye saved”.  If it is by grace we are saved, then it is most important to understand what grace is.  Naturally we do not like grace, because it makes everything of God and nothing of us.  We do not want to
 be made nothing of.  But before we understand the grace of God, we have to
 come to this, to be made nothing of.  Grace, I repeat, makes everything of God.  If we are saved at all, God must get the glory of it;  we shall never be able to credit ourselves with it.

      I have read this beautiful passage in order to show you what grace really is.  We get a picture of it in the story of the good Samaritan.
  
But I want to show you first what leads to its coming out.  A lawyer starts up with the question, “What shall 
I do to inherit eternal life?”  He merely stood up to tempt the Lord; he had no sense of need in his heart.  Mark the words of his question, “What shall 
I do?”  I dare say you have heard the story of the lady and her physician.  The physician was a very religious man, though unconverted.  You know, people may be religious without being saved.  There are different sorts of sinners: there are drunken sinners and sober sinners, and there are religious sinners and irreligious sinners, and so on; but still they are sinners; they are unsaved.  Well, the lady said to her physician as they were conversing one day, 
‘There is just this difference between your religion and mine, doctor: yours is a religion of two letters - d, o; mine is a religion of four letters d, o, n, e’.  
‘Do’ and ‘done’, just the opposite.  The first represents works doing something to gain salvation; the other speaks of what is already accomplished; the one is law, the other grace.  I pray God it may be discovered to you that all is done, you are not asked to do anything.  All His claims have been met and you have simply to rest in what 
has been accomplished.
  The lawyer says “What shall I do?”  The Lord refers him to Exodus, chapter 19.  “What is written in the law?”   I think people forget how the law was introduced.  Listen, “And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire: ... and the whole mount quaked greatly”.  That is how the law was introduced  that law which the lawyer summed up so well.  “How readest thou?” the Lord 
asked.  Well, he was a good reader; you could not have found a better.

  The Lord was asked this question when on His way to Jerusalem to suffer.  He was going there to die.  He was going there to do a work by which alone you and I can be saved.  If ever you get to heaven it will be by what Jesus did, and by that alone.  On His way up He was asked all sorts of questions by all sorts of people who crossed His path.  This lawyer is one of them.  In replying to him the Lord, as it were, says, If it is 
doing with you, you must turn to the law.  What is written there?  And the lawyer answers well; he was a good reader, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself”.  He knew the law.  If he wanted to know about the doing, there it was, “This do, and thou shalt live”.  Yes, but where is the man that has done it?  Can you point out one who has loved God with 
all his heart, and his neighbour as himself?
  The Lord does not say, This do and you shall go to heaven or have eternal life, but “live” - that is, live here on earth.  Why do people die?  
You will have to die some day, but why?  It is not natural to die, it is natural to sleep; you don’t go upstairs to die in the same way that you would go upstairs to sleep.  You have stood by your dying friends, perhaps, and you have seen that it is not natural to die.  Death comes through sin.  “The wages of sin is death”.  The reason people die is because they are 
not fit to live here.  
You know not but that you may die to-night.  Perhaps you hope to go to heaven when you die.  I am not speaking of Christians now; as a matter of fact some Christians will not die at all.  I am speaking of those who are unconverted.  You hope to go to heaven.  Mark it, you die because you are not fit for earth, and yet you hope to go to heaven!  What a strange thing!  How can you think of going to heaven to live with God, when you are not fit for life on earth?  I am not shutting the door of heaven to you, but I want you to understand that that is not the way you can enter in.  It is a solemn subject.  God may stop the beating of your heart this moment.  If you leave this world as not fit to live here, do you think you are going to live with God?  Certainly not.

  People do go to heaven, but on what ground?  You must look that question in the face.  Some of you are playing fast and loose with your souls.  You are like the man who was bringing home to England a very valuable stone.  He used to bring it on deck to show his fellow-passengers.  How they envied him!  He used to throw it up and catch it as 
you might a ball.  
How beautiful it was!  How it sparkled in the sunshine!  But he was playing with it.  One of the passengers said, 
‘Man, you will throw that up once too often and lose it’.  
‘Oh, no, I shall not’, he replied; ‘I am too good a catch’.  However, one day, as he was doing this, the ship gave a lurch and he lost his balance, and overboard went the precious  gem.  You say,  What a fool!  So he was; but what are you doing, and that with your precious soul?  Your soul is not saved, and if you died to-night you would be damned.  That is plain talking.  Do not play fast and loose with your soul.

  I well remember once going through a village in Kent giving away books; I was on my way to catch the train to go to another place to preach, but did not know my way to the station, and the time was nearly up.  I saw a statelylooking gentleman coming along, and stepping up to him I enquired my way.  
‘Come with me and I will show you’, he answered.  We walked along together, chatting about the weather, the crops, and so on, but I had something in my heart I wanted to speak about of more importance than crops - the welfare of his soul.  At last he said, 
‘I will show you a place where five roads meet; you will not see such a thing as that every day’.  This, of course, was interesting in its way, but I turned the conversation by saying, 
‘I would like to ask you one question: What is your way to heaven?’  He stopped, drew himself up, and said, 
‘My way to heaven is to do your duty’.  
He was on the ‘do’ line.  
I looked at him and answered, ‘“Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbour as thyself”.  Have you done that?  That is your duty
’.  He bowed his head as he replied, 
‘I cannot say that I have done that’.  
‘No’, I rejoined, ‘you have broken down there, but look away up to heaven; there is the Lord Jesus, who, when here, loved God with all His heart and His neighbour better than Himself, and such neighbours, too!  He is your only hope
’.  Just think of it.  There was an intelligent man going to meet God on the ground of having done his duty.  At the first statement of his duty he has to own that he has failed in it.  And you, my readers, have not loved God with all your heart and your neighbour as yourself.  You know you have not.  It is no use going on that line.  You love yourself better than your neighbour; I can prove it to you in five minutes.  I will suppose you have got a neighbour next door to
 you, and you live very neighbourly.  She gets a letter from a lawyer telling her that a rich uncle has died and left her £
500, and that if she goes to C-- on a certain day she is to receive it.  Now, when she comes and tells you that, 
would you be just as pleased as if the letter had come for you?  I think you will say, No.  Then that shows that you love yourself that much better than your neighbour.  The fact is, we love ourselves, and we neither love God with all our heart, nor our neighbour as ourselves.  You will never get to heaven by doing your duty.

  There is only one thing that can open the door of heaven  the blood of the Lamb.  It is the work of Christ and not your law-keeping that can take you there.  If you could keep the law, it would only entitle you to life here.  But you know you have sinned, and sooner or later are going to die.  You have now notice to quit, and you may go at any moment.  You cannot deny that fact.

  As men we would like to live here, but you are not fit to live here, and yet you expect to go to heaven!  You do not want to go to hell, and as you cannot stay here you think you would rather go to heaven; but if you could, of the three, you would rather remain on earth.
  
This will not do.
  I want to show you the necessity of the atonement.  I want to show you that your works will never take you to heaven; if they were good enough for that, you would not be taken from the earth.  It is only through the atoning work of Christ that you can enter heaven.

  The lawyer says, “Who is my neighbour?” as much as to say, Show him to me, and I will love him as myself.  He should have owned, I can never do that, but instead of this, “he, 
willing to justify himself”, asks this question, and the Lord in reply gives him the story of the good Samaritan.  He draws a picture, so simple that a child can understand it.  I believe it is really a picture of Himself.

  He begins with, “A certain man”.  Now I want you to see that 
this man is a picture of yourself.  He “
went down”.  It is very simple, but very terrible; it is what has happened to you since the day you came into the world.
  
Your story is told in one word: “Down” is the word; it is a downward path.  If there is an unconverted person here, I do not stop to ask whether you are religious or respectable; in any case these words describe your path.  “He went 
down”. You know your path has been a downward one.  When you were a little child, for instance, your conscience was tender; since then it has been getting harder and harder.

  He went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, from the city of peace and blessing to the city of the curse.  
Unsaved soul, yours is a downward path; you are going down to the pit, your back is turned upon God, your face is hellward, and yet you are saying, I hope to get to heaven when I die!  How can you, if you are going the downward course, and have not been arrested?  The further you go, the faster you go, like a stone rolling down a hill.

  He fell among thieves.  The devil is the thief; he has robbed man.  God made man upright, but oh, what a wreck he is!  Look at him now, oftentimes worse than a beast.  He has indeed fallen among thieves and has been left “half dead”. They wounded him and threw him in the gutter, as many a poor sinner has been thrown down in the mud.  ’Tis then the Saviour seeks him.  Wondrous grace!  If there is one here saying, I am that man; I have tried to be better, but here I am, a poor wounded creature, half dead, I must give it all up, the Saviour draws near to you; He seeks such.  “By chance there came down a certain priest that way”.

  I think the priest represents the law; the priest did nothing for him.  If he had spoken, he would perhaps have told the man to keep the law.  Then the Levite comes and looks on him.  What would he have said if he had spoken?  In modern language, Be baptised; take the sacrament, etc.  Quite right in their place, but they will not save you.  How can a poor man who has lived in sin be saved by being baptised and taking a piece of bread from a minister's hand?  The Levite represents ritualism, but ritualism cannot save  you.

      “But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was”.  Jesus, the Son of God, came down.  When you speak of a journey, there is a purpose in it.  The blessed Lord gives us the purpose of His journey in one verse: “The Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost”.  Here is a Saviour!  From whence did He journey?  From the heights of glory down into this world of sin and sorrow.  Blessed be His name!  Linger over it; it will bring joy to your heart.  I see myself in this picture, and you may see yourself, and rejoice in it.  This blessed Man has drawn near to me, and I want you to realise it, poor hopeless soul!  Is there one hear saying, I have tried to turn over a new leaf.  I have tried to be good and serve God, and it has all ended in failure?  Are you saying that?  Let me tell you the Saviour looks upon you; there is love and compassion in His eyes.  He drew near to him; he came where he was, he looked upon him, he pitied him.  He does not say, You do your part and I will do mine.  No, he draws near and puts his hand upon him.  Will you 
let the Lord put His hand upon you?  You who are trying to be good and fail in it   what will He do for you?  The moment the Samaritan put his hand on that poor man he said, I will do all for you.  He made himself responsible for him ever afterwards.  This is what the Lord does: He makes Himself responsible until He gets us home to heaven.

  Why  does it say “a 
certain Samaritan”?  
I think it means the man had no claim upon him.  We read, “The Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans”.  He could not say, I am a Jew; come and help me.  Ah! dear friend, we have no claim upon the Son of God.  He came unsought; not a voice was heard.  Never had a cry gone up from this earth to God, Send Thy Son to save us!  No, it came out of the heart of God that He should come.  He took, as it were, that Treasure and gave Him up that He might save us!  He
 “came where he was”.  
I like that.  
The Lord give us the joy of it!  
He saw him, looked on him, had compassion on him, drew near to him.  
He draws near to you, my friend.  I think I hear Him say, I will do all for thee from now until I get thee home to heaven.  Will you let Him do everything for you?  That is 
grace.
  He does three things for him: he binds up the wounds, he pours in the oil, and he pours in the wine.  “God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life”.  That is a beautiful bandage.

  What is the oil?  The efficacy of the work of Christ applied to the conscience by the Spirit.  There could have been no healing apart from that work.  Jesus suffered on the cross in order that He might pour the oil into your wounds.  Is there a troubled soul here?  Let Him pour in the oil.  Do you know what they do at sea?  I have seen many a storm.  When the sea is very rough, and there is danger of its breaking over the ship and swamping her, they have a method of putting an oil-barrel in a certain position and allowing the oil to run out slowly on to the water, and this to a great extent smoothes its surface.  Is your soul troubled like the troubled sea?  Let the Lord as the Good Samaritan pour the oil in, and there shall be a 
great calm.
  There was a poor woman in Luke 7 who came to the Saviour; the tears were rolling down her cheeks on to His feet.  Oh, my sins!  oh, my sins!  There she was in trouble, and the Saviour pours in the oil.
  
“Thy sins are forgiven”.  “Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace”.  That is the “oil”.
  
Thank God, I know what the oil is!
  Listen, here is another scripture: “Their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more”. No MORE, NO MORE.  Precious drops of oil!  God will remember them no more.  He says so.

  I remember preaching the gospel in a village in Essex: there was no church or chapel in the place.  Right opposite to me in the meeting sat a woman.  I saw she was troubled.  I said to her after the preaching was over, 
‘Well, mother, how is it with you?’.  
‘Oh’, she replied, ‘I have not got peace’. I spoke a few words, but could not stay long with her, for I had to go to another village for the night.  Next morning, as I was sitting reading my Bible, the Lord said to me, 
‘Go over to that other village and visit’.  I closed my book and started off.  When I reached the village I knocked at the first door I came to.  A young woman opened it, saying, as she did so, 
‘Have you heard what has happened?  This morning, as mother was sitting at breakfast, she was taken with paralysis.  We took her upstairs, and she has been crying out ever since, O Lord, send the preacher to me with words
’.  I went upstairs, and as I stepped inside the bedroom she turned her face towards the door and said, 
‘Have you words for me?’  I replied, 
‘Yes, thank God, I have; the Lord Jesus says this to you, “Thy sins are forgiven, thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace”’.  
‘She was with my Master in spirit, and turning her eyes away from me, she said, ‘Lord, I do thank Thee for beautiful words’.  She looked away from me; I was only the signpost to point her to the Saviour.  She was looking up into His face and praising Him for the oil He had poured in.  Will 
you let Him pour in the oil?  “Thy sins are forgiven.  Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace”.  I do pray God that that may be sounding in your chamber yonder to-night.  “Their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more”.  
No more.  
What does that mean?  That they were remembered when God laid them on Him.  He cried with a bitter cry, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” He died that we might have the oil.

  Now, what is the wine?  That is the best of it.
  
The wine is the love of the Son of God; the joy of His love is wine.  Wine in scripture always means joy.  You  will never get any true joy till you know that Jesus loves you.
  
It is like the good Samaritan saying to the poor Jew, I love you.  That is the wine.  “The Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me”.  Loved 
me, a wretch like me!  Does He love me?  Yes, He does.

  Three blessed sunbeams, gilding all I see; 
  Three tender chords, each full of melody; 
  Three healing leaves, balm for my agony.
WHO.
  He lovéd me - the Father's only Son;
  He gave Himself, the precious, spotless One;
  He shed His blood, and thus the work was done.

LOVED.
  He loved, not merely pitied.  Here I rest: 

  Sorrow may come, I to His heart am pressed,
  What should I fear while sheltered on His breast 
ME.
  Wonder of wonders!  Jesus loved me  

  A wretch, lost, ruined, sunk in misery!
  He sought me, found me, raised me, set me free.
  My soul, the order of the words approve 
  Christ first, me last; nothing between but love.  

  Lord, keep me always down - Thyself above.
  ‘Nothing between but love’.  That is the wine.  I tell you what, dear people: we know what earthly love is, God has implanted that in our breast; but natural love brings sorrow, divine love brings joy.  You remember,  mother, when you lost that child, how you sorrowed and sorrowed, how you followed it to the grave, you stood beside that grave, then you went home and looked at the chair in which it used to sit.  The father forgot his sorrow after a while, but you could not forget; and when you had put the other children to bed you would go and open the drawer and look at the little shoes and the clothes it  used to wear, and the tears would steal down your cheeks.  Why did you sorrow so?  Ah!  there is nothing like a mother's love.  All that sorrow was because of human love.
  
It is of God, you know.  
But I would like you at such a moment to pillow your head on the Saviour's breast.  No rude hand of death can interfere with the love of Jesus.  I don’t know how you get on in sorrow without Him.
  
I pity you!  To whom do you turn in your sorrow?  It is a sweet thing 
to know His love and to know that nothing can take Him from you.  Your heart can never be bereft of that love.

  Then let me say to you, dear believers, hold things here lightly; don’t grasp them tightly, or it will cause you sorrow.  “
Lay hold on eternal life”.  Let your heart go to heaven before you get there yourself.  Let your heart be entwined around that blessed Person with whom you are soon going to be for ever.

  The Good Samaritan desires to draw near to you, dear troubled soul, and to put His hand on you and to say, I love you.  He would pour in the 
oil and the wine.  The wine is the joy of His love.

  And what does he do next?  He first 
cured him.  Did he then say, I have done all this for you, and now you must get on the best way you can?  Oh, no; he puts him on his own beast.  It is not as some people tell us.  That the Saviour does His part, and we have to do ours.  Our part?  What is our part?  Our part is to 
let Him do all for us.
  Does he say, I have cured you, now go back to Jerusalem and behave yourself?  That is not grace, it is not the fulness of grace.  He does not stop with curing him, he sets him on his own beast.  The same power, he says, that carried me shall carry you.  For us it is the power of the Spirit; that is the power in which the Lord went through the world.  If He has cured you He will carry you.

  I  knew a woman who said, 
‘I have such a bad temper, I know it would not do for me to confess Christ: I should be sure to break down if I did’.  That is just what the devil tells people.  Much he cares about the honour of Christ!  He likes to keep souls from confessing Him.  I took out my pencil and tried to stand it on end.  
‘There’, I said, ‘I am as helpless as that pencil.  I am as powerless to-night apart from Christ as I was the first day I was converted
’.  What we want is power, and that Christ gives.

  Well, she confessed Christ, and when I went to see her again she had a beaming face.  She said, 
‘Oh, I have been getting on wonderfully; it seems as though the children were different and everything  else
’.  She  had  been looking to the Lord and He had given her power.

  He “set him on his own beast”.  Will you let the Saviour carry you?  He first cures, then carries you.

  Then he takes him to an inn.  The moment a man is converted this world is turned into an inn to him.  We have an 
inn here, a home there.  If I were staying at an inn in this place, you might ask me how I was getting on.  How do you like your quarters?  Oh, I should say, it is a very good stopping-place, but I am hoping to be at home soon.  We are going to be off directly.  “He brought him to an inn”.  He made a stranger of him.

  Do you know who the host is?  The Holy Ghost.  The Lord said just as He was going away, speaking of the Father, “He shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever”.  Every Christian is committed to the care of the Holy Ghost.

  And what next?  “Whatsoever thou spendest more, when 
I come again I will repay thee”.  I am coming back to fetch him.  The man was cured, carried, cared for, and called for.  Thank God for the last!  The precious Saviour, the Son of God, is coming to fetch us.  Christ shall do it all.  I am not looking to die.  I may fall asleep, but I am not looking for that, but for the One who has cured me, carried me, cared for me, and will call for me.
  
How many of you would like Him to come to-night?  Would you like to hear His voice?  Every Christian on the earth will be caught up.  “The dead in Christ shall rise first, then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them” -  a glorious company - “to meet the Lord in the air”.

  Where will you be when He comes?  He will shut the door then.  On which side of the door will you be?  There are only two sides, inside and outside, the saved side and the lost side, heaven’s side and hell’s side.  “They that were ready went in with him: ... and the door was shut”.  When He comes the door will be 
shut.  
That will settle it for ever.  “Lord, Lord, open to us!” - piercing cry! - only gets the answer, “I know you not”.  If you do not accept the precious grace of the Lord Jesus Christ now, He will shut that door upon you then and say, “I know you not”, and you must spend that awful eternity of woe in the lake of fire.  Oh, God grant that you may accept His grace now and let Him cure you, carry you, care for you, and then at His coming He will call for you.  What does this story say?  It is the Lord saying, I will do all for you.

  Now let us go on to the other verses.  “A certain woman named Martha received him into her house”.  She loved the Lord and she received Him.  “And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard his word”.  Look at these two women.  Martha says, I will care for Him.  Mary says, He shall care for me.  Mary understands the good Samaritan.  Martha lives not very far from the lawyer.  I do not say she is the same as the lawyer, because she loved the Lord and he did not.  All the trouble we get into as Christians is through not letting the Lord do everything for us.  I put a question to you: Have you the sense in your soul that God - your Father - will do the very best thing for you?  Just let that question come home: Have you the sense in your soul that the Lord Jesus, your precious Saviour, will do the very best thing for you?

  I said to a little girl in a house where I was staying, ‘When you were getting up this morning did you wonder where your breakfast was to come from, or whether you would have any at all?’  She looked at me, and smiled at the idea of such a thing.  Of course she did not.  That was because she had confidence in her parents’ care and love.  What would you think if your children fretted about such things?  It is a splendid luxury to
 trust God.  There is not a single good thing that He will withhold from you, not a single thing that is good.  Martha says, I will care for Him; then she breaks down.

  A legal person is always fault-finding.  May the Lord give us a deeper sense of His grace!  “Dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to
 serve alone?”  He says, “Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her”.  What is the good part?  She sat at His feet and heard His word.

  This helps us to understand Romans 7.  There we get the two husbands, the Law and Christ; the first husband demands, the second husband supports.  There is a great difference between demand and support.  It is through the death of Christ we are delivered from the first husband.  We are become dead to
 the law.  What for?  That we should be married to another.  Martha was not separated from the first husband.  She says, 
I will do; that is law, and with the additional demand of the love of Christ.  His love makes the  obligation the  more terrible.
  
Mary says, I am married to another.  
He shall undertake for me.
  Are you going through the day like this: Lord, do Thou support me; I am afraid of myself, I cling to Thee?  Do
 you not think He will support you?  
He will.  
There is not a bit of fruit to God unless He does.  “Thou also  hast wrought all our works in us”.  When the test comes Mary can do the right thing at the right time.  The Lord bless His word to you.

_____________________

RIGHTEOUSNESS AND PEACE
Romans 5: 1-5.
  In  the  passage I have read you will find four or five
 distinct blessings which I desire to bring before you.  My thought is to speak to the youngest here; and what will suit the youngest, if clothed with the power of the Spirit, will be a blessing to the oldest.

  The first thing I desire to speak of is what is found in the first verse, an expression very often used but little understood, “Peace with God”, the first great positive blessing you receive as Christians.  It is not a thing you ripen into; it is not a thing you attain to after a certain amount of experience: but it is what you get at the start, and if not established in that you will make no progress at all in Christian life.

  The second verse sets before us two points: our Place with God, “By whom also we have access by faith into this favour wherein we stand”.  That is our present place with God.  The last clause of the verse sets before us our future 
Prospect.
  Then in verse 3 we have our Path and all that we find in the Path; and in verse 5 our present and future Portion, the love of God.
  Now let us come to the first point, Peace with God.  
I do not think this is understood by a great many.  I do not take it for granted that because you are in a certain position, because you have made a profession, or because you partake of the Lord's supper, that you have got hold of this, or that you are established in it.  Do not think to yourself, Oh! that is a thing I know.  A number of Christians confound two things, “peace 
with God” and “the peace of God”, but they are very distinct.  
I need peace with God as a guilty sinner; I need the peace of God as a tried saint.  Peace with God depends upon Another; the enjoyment of the peace of God depends upon myself.  “The peace of God” is spoken of in Philippians 4: 6, 7, a very beautiful passage, well known to
 many of us, but little known experimentally.  You see at once, as you read the passage, that the possession of this wonderful blessing depends on ourselves - that is, that you and I as Christians are exhorted to bring all our cares to God and to cast them all on Him; and then, as another has said, “If we roll our cares on God, He will roll His peace into our hearts”.  Think of God's repose!  What a proposal for us!  That is the way to
 meet our cares and difficulties.  You get the idea in Psalm 3: “Many there be which say of my soul, There is no h
elp for him in God.  Selah.  But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of mine head … I laid me down and slept; I awaked
; for the Lord sustained me”.  If they say, “There is no h
elp for him in God”, he says, “Thou, O Lord, art a shield for me”.  That is what Stephen had in his heart, the unruffled peace of the place where Christ is.  “I laid me down and slept”.  Not a poor storm-tossed creature.  May we know the peace of God keeping our hearts.  But when we speak of peace with God, we are on a quite different line.  As a guilty sinner I need peace with God.  There are two things that are linked together in scripture: righteousness and peace.

  I have often told the story of the dear old soul who, when visited by a clergyman and asked in what she was trusting, replied, ‘I am trusting in the righteousness of God’.  At
 which the clergyman said, ‘You must be making a mistake: you mean you are trusting in the mercy of God’.  
‘No’, said she, ‘I am trusting in the righteousness of God’.  I think that old lady knew what peace with God was.  Perhaps she could not have explained it, but she knew the nature of the blessing the gospel of God is.  It is very interesting to me to notice that in the last few verses of Acts we get the preacher preaching the gospel, and in the beginning of Romans the gospel he preached; you go from the preacher to the subject of his preaching.  The gospel of  God,  he tells  us, is concerning His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and he is careful to link it up with what had gone before.
  
I  beg  you  to  note that.  “Which he had promised afore by his prophets in the holy scriptures”, as he says in writing to the Corinthians, “How that Christ died for our sins 
according to  the scriptures
”.  
It is concerning His Son Jesus Christ.  His eye is at once fixed on this blessed Person.

  Then in verse 17 he says, “For therein is the righteousness of God revealed”.  I think if you had written it you would have said, 
‘Therein the love of God is revealed’: but it does not say so, but that the righteousness of God is revealed.  People do not see this, and that is the reason they have not peace.  There is no mention of love till you get to chapter 5.  The love of God is the known and enjoyed portion of the children of God.

  Let us look at it carefully and simply.  What does it mean?  The  righteousness of God - what does that convey to your mind?  Let me explain it to you.  The righteousness of God is God's consistency with Himself; it is God being true to Himself.  In the gospel God tells us that 
He will be true to what He is.  He will not give that up.  He will not move from what He is.  If He be God and if He act, it must be according to what He is.  “Therein is the  righteousness of God revealed”.

  Then immediately the apostle breaks off and goes back to the testimony God had rendered to man in times past.  It is very important, because all these things are being called in question.  I am afraid we have been damaged by not beginning with chapters 1, 2, 3  of Romans.  You must begin at the beginning.  The apostle takes us back and shows us how God had spoken to man in days that are past.  People are constantly asking, 
‘What about the heathen?’  I say, God has spoken to them; He has given them a testimony.  Psalm 19 tells  yon creation is God's witness to man: “There is no speech nor language
, where their voice is not heard”.  God has spoken through creation.  And what did men do when they knew God?  “Glorified him not as God, neither were thankful”.  They turned to their own imaginations.  They “changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things”.  Mark that!  They began with man, and went down to serpents.  Think of it, man come down to worship a serpent.  And why?  Because he gave up God.  Why does the Spirit of God tell us all this?  The Spirit of God proves how we needed the righteousness of God.

  God had taken up the Jew, had given him the law.  What happened?  “The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles” through him.  If God gives a testimony, it is that He may be glorified.  He gave the Gentile a testimony in creation.  What is man's answer to it?  They glorified Him not as God.  He gave the Jews a testimony in the law.  What is the result?  God's name blasphemed among the Gentiles through them.  What is the Spirit of God proving?  The utter unrighteousness of man and his need of the righteousness of God.

  This is something like John the Baptist preparing the way of the Lord.  He came in the way of righteousness.  He came preaching repentance.  If we are to get blessing, we must see that we 
need righteousness; we have none of our own.  In the middle of chapter 3 the apostle brings in all men guilty, and then resumes the subject of the righteousness of God.

  Having said this, in order to bring my subject before you in a practical way, I take you back to two men in the Old Testament.  You will remember David, and how his son Absalom slew his brother and had to 
fly from his father, and how David yearned over Absalom.  There was affection in his heart; but then he was the king, and he had to maintain the righteousness of the throne.  How could he bring these two things together?  If he gratifies the affection of his heart, he shatters his throne.  The commonest criminal in Israel would be able to reproach him with it.  He would be able to say, You have put me in prison for my crime, but your son you have taken back to yourself to gratify your affection, and at the expense of the righteousness of your throne.  Well, you know that is what David did; he sacrificed righteousness for love.

  Take another illustration, Darius the king.  His princes hate Daniel, and they get the king to make a decree by which they intended to entrap and ruin him.  Daniel opens his window and prays to God three times a day just as before.  He prays in the presence of God, and not in the presence of men.  Here is a man who is with God in the secret of his heart.  Well, the princes go to the king and tell him that Daniel has broken the law, and so must suffer.  I think I can see the king pacing his palace, with his hand on his head, as he laboured till the going down of the sun to deliver him.  He says to himself, I am king, I want to maintain my place as king, and I want to gratify my heart.  But he could not solve that problem, and Daniel had to be cast into the den of lions.

  What man cannot do, God can.  He can maintain what is due to Himself, and also gratify the love of His heart.  Where the righteousness of God came out in all its fulness was on the cross.  Christ was “delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification”.  There are two statements here: He “was delivered for our offences”.  That is one; it is easy enough to read it, it is another thing to see what it involves.
  
Paul says to Philemon, speaking of Onesimus, “If he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee ought, put that on mine account”.  He “was delivered for our offences”; they were laid upon Him there in that awful hour that never can be fathomed.  Who can fathom those depths?  None  but  God.  And  what did  Christ say - that One who had said, “Which of you convinceth me of sin?”  What did he say?  “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken  me?”  Why  did  God  forsake  Him?  Because He would be true to Himself.  Look at the righteousness of God.  He would not spare that blessed One, although loved by Him beyond compare, because He was the sin-bearer.  Who can fathom it?
  
Jesus the sin-bearer, and God so true to Himself that He forsook Him.
  But it is not at the foot of the cross that your burden rolls away; you do not get peace there.  On the cross the Lord said, “It is finished!”  But how do I know that that is true?  I have it from God.  My eternal destiny hangs on the verity of His word.  Now mark the other statement: “Was raised again for our justification”.  God raised Him up out of death.  We are responsible creatures - responsible to God.  I can never know peace until I know that righteousness has been met; I 
must know it if I am to have peace.  But people can never know peace unless they have known trouble - soul trouble.  They do not know their need of it until they have a sense of guilt.  There is a moral work in the soul in keeping with all this of which I am speaking.  It is not by an effort of the mind, but by God making the soul to feel its need, and then showing it how that need is met.

  As I go about and meet Christians, I say, How do you know you are saved?  And their minds revert to something that happened twenty years ago.  I do not deny that something did happen twenty years ago, but that is no ground to stand upon.  I asked a woman one day, 
‘When did you get peace?’ and she said, ‘If you would come with me to get it’.  You say, Do you deny that something happened there?  I do not.  But if you ask me if I have peace with God, the question is not what happened twenty years ago, but am I in the faith of God's testimony now?  I do not deny the fact of the start, or that you may be conscious of the start.  Many are troubled because they cannot look back at a start.  Do not be troubled about that.  You have been brought up in a Christian household perhaps, and your heart has been gradually opened to the things of the Lord, like Lydia of old, of whom it was said, “whose heart the Lord opened”.  But you would have a jailer-like conversion.  Do not wish for it.  Thank God, He gives us specimen conversions.  I do not think all of us come in on the jailer's lines.  Do not be troubled.  The point is, Are you in the faith of God's testimony now?

  You say, I am a needy soul; I feel my responsibility to God.  How can it be met?  Now, God renders a testimony and you believe it.  It is an old-fashioned way of getting blessing; it is as old as Abraham.  Abraham believed God.  Against hope he believed in hope.  He had not a single experience.  Why did he believe?  Because God had spoken.  God had said, “So shall thy seed be”, and Abraham believed Him.

  Besides the story of the old lady who trusted in the righteousness of God, I will give you a companion story of an old man who was sitting at his cottage door with his Bible on his knees and his finger on the page he was reading, who was heard to say as he read, ‘I think Thy thoughts after Thee, O God’. There is a moral grandeur about that.  It glorifies God.  Faith glorifies God apart from one single experience.  “Who against hope believed in hope”.  Not a hope as far as he was concerned.  Like Paul in the storm (Acts 27),
 “when neither sun nor stars in many days appeared, ... all hope that we should be saved was then taken  away”.  Then  comes out the man of faith in moral grandeur; it is very simple, but very grand.  “Be of good cheer: for I believe God
”, that it shall be even as it was told me.  What?  get to shore?  Can you not hear the billows roar and see the waves?  Yes.  “Who against hope believed in hope”.  “
I believe God”.  
It is not what I feel.
  Now I come to the point, What does God say to you?  Where does He point us?  To ourselves?  To the work of the Spirit of God in me?  No; the gospel of God is concerning His Son Jesus Christ our Lord.  God points you to Him and tells you two things about Him.  He “was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification”. What answer do you give to His testimony?  Abraham believed God.  Do you?  If you do, what happens?  The righteousness that forsook Jesus is the righteousness that clears you.  It is only one righteousness.  God is true to Himself.  Do you think it is too great a thing for me to say, I am a person against whom God cannot bring a charge?  I do not say, Will not, but Cannot.  Why?  Because He would not be righteous if He did.  Are you there?  Do you answer, I 
was there twenty years ago?  Are you there 
now?  
God is perfectly satisfied with what Christ has done.  God grant that this may be better known and enjoyed.

  Now I come to the second blessing - Access.  Mark you, it is, “By whom”.  The eye is still fixed on Jesus Christ our Lord.  By Him we have access into this grace wherein we stand.  We stand in the favour of God.  One is charmed with the thought, the favour of God.  How do you measure the favour of God?  If you had asked a Jew, Where do you see the favour of God?  he would have said: Come out here.  Do you see those fields of corn, this beautiful fruit, and those herds and flocks?  These are the marks of God's favour.  Beloved Christians, 
you must not look that way.  I do not mean that we are not to be grateful for mercies here; do not misunderstand me: but that is not the mark of God's favour.  Where do 
we look?  At Christ.  I measure God's favour by Christ.
  
I am in it now, and never out of it.  May we know thus how to measure His 
favour.
  Now what is the prospect?  
The expression is very familiar to us.  We “rejoice in hope of the glory of God”.  Here we get hope, and it is connected with the glory of God.  If you turn to Romans 8, you find the passage, “We are saved by hope”.  But this is a deeper thing.  I am so put with God through redemption, so on God's side, that I can rejoice as I think of His glory; not my new body, but God's glory; the scene where everything will be suitable to Him, where God can say, Everything My eye rests upon suits Me.  And it suits 
you because you have been brought to be with Him.  It is not that you will be relieved of all your troubles, have a new body, and so on; all quite true, but you rejoice in hope of God's glory.

  Another thing: The eye of Christ will rest upon it, and He will be able to say, I sorrowed and suffered to bring it all about.  Do you like to think of the joy of Christ in that day?  His joy is that God is glorified, and that everything is suitable to the nature and character of God.  We belong to that scene.  What I mourn over is my insensibility to it.  If I lived more in that scene, I
 should be more sensitive to the character of things here.  I think of the blessed Lord down here.  Who can tell what He suffered to live down here and see the things that we see?  We get hardened.  If we lived with God more, we should feel it more.  We cannot see the glory of God here.  I see man, a vessel marred by sin; and is it not terrible that when out of the presence of God we can laugh at sin!  If I were with God I could not do that, but should mourn over it, over all that is inconsistent with His glory.  Thank God we belong to the scene that is suitable to Him.

  Now I come to the path.  
“And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also”.  What comes upon us in the path in tribulation.
  
Look at the sharp turn the scripture takes.  When with God we can even glory in tribulation.  We can view it in this light - it works out good for us.  The path of a Christian is not a path of prosperity.  No; the blessed Lord said, “In the world ye shall have tribulation”.  It is well for us to
 face it: but before we embrace the path we are set in God's favour.  Tribulation does not mean what we so often talk about - the trouble that is common to man.  “Man is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward”, but it is not that.  It is the consequence of being brought to God.  We are brought home to God, blessed in His favour, and because we are, this world is turned into a wilderness; it is redemption that has done it.  And now we glory in 
tribulation.  Why?  Because it breaks your will, and the effect of that is patience, and then patience works experience.  There is a certain school always occupied with experience.  Perhaps we go to the other extreme.  I would go a long way to hear a person speak of how he went through a strait with God.  Some people can tell you much about the theory, but they have no experience of what God has been to them in a strait.  We learn God, not a mere truth.  We learn Christ.  If you have Christ, you have the truth, but you may have the truth in a certain way without having Christ.  What we need is the practical experience of what God is.

  “And experience, hope”.  Now we are turned back to hope.  We began with hope.  The hope is enlarged because we are with the God of hope, and the love of God, which is the spring of all, is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost.  Now we have reached the love of God.
  
There is nothing about the love of God in the previous chapters.  The love of God is the enjoyed portion of the one who has the Spirit.  May the Lord bless these few remarks to you, and may that first great blessing, “
Peace with God”, be yours, and then may you know your Place with God, and your Prospect, that you may be braced up for your Path; and may you know that blessed Portion, the love of God, ours now, ours for eternity; and to be more fully realised when with Christ.
_____________________
  
  
THE LOVE OF GOD
Romans 5: 5-8.
  On a previous occasion we were considering the blessings set forth in the first four verses of this chapter.  
I propose now to dwell upon the following verses which give us our portion.  “The love of God”.  I could show you from the writings of both Paul and John that this love is the spring of all.  You cannot get beyond it: that love is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost.  The Spirit is given to me to make that love good in me.
  
I do not wait to go to heaven to enjoy it; it is perfected in us now.  
Love is realised.  I have now touched upon an important point, and perhaps some of you are saying, That is the very point; I should like to realise love.  I met a man once who said he should like to have blessing from God, but he was waiting to have the love of God shed abroad in his heart.  But in this scripture, directly after the realisation of the love is spoken of, you are turned away to consider the great expression of the love of God.  
‘Well proved in what it’s done’.  The Spirit of God takes our eyes from love realised to love expressed.  You are turned to what produces the realisation.  “God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us”.  This takes us to the when and the how it was manifested.  You cannot start from your own heart.  How much have you realised the love of God?  In the measure in which you know the love expressed.  Love must be manifested before it can be realised.  People are looking for the love in their own hearts.  You must get to the fountain first - the heart of God.  He has given us His Spirit, and the Spirit produces in our hearts the realisation of His love by pointing out to us the manifestation of His love.

  Here for the first time in this epistle we reach love.  Before I go on I should like to say: The love of God never could give us peace; it must be the righteousness of God for that; the question of our sins must be settled righteously, or there is no peace.  The love of God is the source of all blessing.  Our sin was great, but love provided what righteousness demanded.  I am anxious as to this point, because we cannot go on until it is settled.  God has put these two things together, righteousness and peace, and we must not separate them.  If you put them together in your soul, then you can go on to enjoy the spring and source of all - the love of God.  The first time the indwelling
 Spirit is spoken of in this epistle it is in connection with shedding abroad the love of God; the Spirit is given that you may enjoy the love.  That is what I call realising.  Our hearts are made sensible of God's love.
  
You cannot get beyond that.  
That is our portion.
  We have reached the ocean now.  We can never be better loved than we are now, but we may enjoy it more, and shall by-and-by.  What a thought!  I am loved as much now as ever I shall be.  My enjoyment of it is another thing; but God loves you and me, dear saint, as much now as ever He will.

  I want to speak to you of the love of God in five different ways: firstly, the Manifestation of love; secondly, the Commendation of love; thirdly, the Perfection of love; fourthly, the Manner of love; and fifthly, the Measure of love.  And now you will expect that, if I am going to dwell upon the love of God, I shall tu
rn to John 3: 16; for that is the first statement we get of it in scripture.  Let us tu
rn to it.  Here we get the 
manifestation of love.  If  I asked any one of you to quote the verse, I will answer for it that you would not quote it correctly.  “God so loved the world”.  Have I quoted it correctly?  I have not.  We must be careful how we quote scripture.  What is it then? 
“For God so loved the world”.  You may think that that is a very small difference, but 
it all hangs on that.  
You cannot understand scripture unless you read it in its connection.  Go back to verse 14.  No one can understand verse 16 unless he understand the brazen serpent.  “As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up”.  The serpent of brass was a type of Christ on the cross, giving the aspect of His death that I trust God will make known to every reader.  You understand, perhaps, that Christ is the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world; but here we have a serpent of brass as a type of the Lord.  What does it mean?  The serpent of brass does not set forth the Lord Jesus as the bearer of sins.  It is not in that connection He is seen here, but with the judgment of 
sin.
  Let me recall to you that incident in Numbers to which the Lord refers.  Look at that people; they are nearing the end of their journey; they say to Moses, “Our soul loatheth this light bread”.  What a terrible thing  to say!  God's eye rested on them; He heard what they said, and sent fiery serpents which bit the people so that they died.  They were poisoned; their lives were poisoned.  They were dead and dying with the poison of the serpent in their veins.  Their natural lives were poisoned.  God told Moses to make a serpent of brass and put it on a pole, so that every one that was 
bitten might look at it and live.  
It was to be made of brass: brass always means judgment; and when they looked at the serpent of brass they lived.
  Let us go further back to the story of the fall of man.  Man disobeyed God and fell.  We are witnesses of that fall.  I need not go to the Old Testament to see that man is a fallen being.  When man disobeyed God he received the sting of the serpent.  Who was the  serpent?  The devil.  What was the sting of the serpent?  The sting of the serpent was 
hate.  
When man disobeyed God, he hated the God he had disobeyed.  Satan hated God, and we receive the sting of the serpent morally, as they received it physically.  What is God going to do with the flesh that hates Him?  Will He
 forgive it?  No.  God never forgives the flesh.  He forgives sins, but He condemns 
sin in the flesh.  Behold in that uplifted Son of man, made sin for us, the condemnation of sin in the flesh.  That is gospel.  He was made what we are.  It is not only that He bore our sins, but that which put God's Son upon the cross has been condemned in His death.

  I will prove to you that man hates God.  You know the parable, “Last of all he sent unto them his son”. What was the outcome of that?  They said, “This is the heir; come, let us kill him”.  That is the flesh - hate.  On the cross He was made what we are.  When you come to the history of it, you see Him there on the cross dead, on either side a 
dying man, but the centre man dead.  
The soldier takes a spear and pierces His side.  John, who had laid his head on that bosom, watched the soldier.  What was the answer to the soldier's spear?  Blood and water.  I want you to think of
 the two ends of that spear.  
My hatred at one end, His love at the other.  John bears record, and his record is true.  From that bosom came forth blood and water - blood to expiate guilt, and water to cleanse from the defilement of the flesh; both by death.  Behold the moral beauty of the gospel!  There might have been written across that spearpierced side two scriptures, “God is light” and “God is love”.  “God is light”; nothing but the blood can satisfy His claims.  “God is love”; God so loved where I so hated.  Where my hatred was proved, God’s love was proved too.  There at that cross rose higher and higher the hate of man, but above it all rose the mighty love of God.  Where man so hated, God so loved.  My degradation and ruin is the dark background for the love of God.  He says, I take advantage of your hate and ruin to show out My love.  Have you ever stood by the seashore and looked at the cliffs to see how high the tide rises?  You can see the mark of it and can say, I know the water has reached as high as that.  At the cross the love of God rises up far above 
and beyond all the hate of man.  Now you can see why “For” comes in in John 3: 16.  Now I will take you to another passage.  Remember the manifestation of the love is my point just now.  John's Epistle, chapter 4: 7
: “Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God”.  In this passage Christians are exhorted to love one another.  God never needed to be told to love, but we do; we are exhorted, not to look for love, but to show it.  Some people are always looking for love.  You are not told to look for love, but to exhibit it; and if you do this, you will find it.  You have sometimes to pour water into a pump in order to get water out.

      Another thing I would like to say: It is God's love, not human love.  God loves with a holy love that will never tolerate a stain on its object.  God says, I love you with a love that will not allow a spot on you; I will not tolerate it.

      Let me just repeat a passage where you get the exhibition of love.  Writing to the Corinthians, Paul says (2 Cor 12: 15), “I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you
, the less I be loved”.  What!  Go on loving, though the more I love the less I am loved!  Where is such a man living?  In the love of God, or he could not speak like that.

      Now come to verse 9 (1 John 4), “In this was manifested the love of God toward us”.  Here you have it 
toward you.  How?  “Because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world
, that we might live through him.  Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins”.  The manifestation of the love of God is connected with the sending of His Son that we may live, and also to be a propitiation for our sins.  How can you talk about the love of God apart from atonement?  This doctrine is all about the contrary: it has the hiss of the serpent in it.  Turn from it.  What does our scripture say? He sent His Son to be a propitiation for our sins - on the one hand that we may have life, and on the other as a propitiation for our sins.  Behold the manifestation of the love of God.  If you want to see love, herein is love.

      You see the Spirit of God began in verse 7 by exhorting us to love one another, and in order to produce love, He shows how love has acted towards us.  Love manifested towards you beget love realised in you –  “the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts” - and love realised in you results in love exhibited toward others.  But you must start at the top with love manifested toward you; then follows love realised in you.  Whose 
love?  God's love.  I will tell you how much you love God.  In the measure in which you have realised His love toward you.  Your heart responds to love in the measure in which you have taken it in.  It cannot flow out if it does not flow in.  The love of God is shed abroad in your heart, and then it flows out.  The moment you take in love, the natural result is - you love.

      Now come back with me to Romans 5.  We get the 
Commendation of love here.  A man once told me he had been waiting thirteen years for the love of God to be shed abroad in his heart.  I said to him, 
‘Did you ever read verses 6, 7, and 8 of Romans 5?’  Look at the structure of the scripture.  The moment the Spirit of God speaks of love realised in your heart He calls your attention to when, where, and how the love was expressed.  If the man had believed the next verse, he would soon have realised the love of God shed abroad in his heart.  “For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly.  For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: … but God commendeth his love toward us
, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us”.  That is the commendation of the love.  I am not called to look into my heart to see whether God loves me; that is miserable self-occupation; you must look outside yourself.  You must see the love there, in the cross, before you can realise it in your heart.  It is the outside look gives inside enjoyment.

      Now I come to point three: the Perfection of love.  If you have Bibles with marginal references, you will see that it should read thus: “Herein 
has love been perfected with us that we may have boldness in the day of judgment; that even as he is, we also are in this world”.  Some have even said to me when I have read the passage, 
‘Certainly you have a different Bible from ours; that is not in ours’; and, they have gone to look.  My dear friends, here it is in the word, and it is here for your joy and blessing.  “
Even as he is, so are we in this world”.  It is this latter clause that people say is not in their Bibles.  It is God's love that is made perfect with us, and it is with a view to giving us boldness in the day of judgment.  Think of the proposal.  The day of judgment is a very solemn thing.  It is the day when God will take cognisance of evil and will judge it.  He is the centre of the moral universe, and He must judge evil.  How can I have boldness in that day? Because as He is, so are we in this world.  Who is 
He?  Christ.  It does not say here we shall be like Him.  There 
is a passage which says, “We shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is”, but here it is: “As he is, so are we in this world”.  That is the answer to 
the serpent of brass.  The serpent of brass is Christ made what I am; here it is, I am made what He is.  As He is in all His grace and moral worth, as He is to God’s satisfaction, so am I in this world.  That is the perfection of His love.  Who could have imagined it!  But the Holy Ghost has written it.

      This is the spring of holiness.  Is Christ clear of sin?  So am I.  Is He clear of judgment?  So am I.  Is He loved?  So am I.  I pray God His people may know the perfection of His love as set forth here.  Here is a heritage, and saints are being cheated out of it, and that partly because they do not read the scriptures in faith.  “As he is, so are we in this world”.  What does it mean?  I will tell you.  “Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him”.  As much as to say, I will make you suitable to my presence.  I will so put you before Me that I may let My love out to you as I do to My Son.  The Christian is made meet and suitable for God Himself.

  Now the next verse: “There is no fear in love”.  If there is a bit of fear in your heart, it is because you do not know you are as Christ is.  “Fear hath torment”.  Suppose I am going home, I send a wire to say, I will be home by the four o'clock train.  I go to the door of my house.  I go in.  There is great silence.  I say to my wife, Where are the children?  She replies, From the time we received the telegram the children's hearts have been filled with fear, and they are gone upstairs to hide themselves.  Filled with fear!  What would that be to my heart?  A cruel cut indeed; any one can understand that.  But how would it really be?  As I come up the roadway, what do I see?  Three little faces against the window-pane, and the moment the door is open they rush to welcome me.  “Perfect love casteth out fear”.  I have heard God's people sing:-

     ’Tis a point I long to know; 
     Oft it causes anxious thought:
     Do I love the Lord or no?
     Am I His, or am I not?
  That thought is not here.  It is a doleful ditty; I used to sing it.  “Perfect love casteth out fear”.  Anxious thought!  Yes, it may cost you anxious thought if it is 
your love you are thinking about; but think of His love.
  I can only indicate the other points very briefly.  The 
Manner of the love is in chapter 3 of this epistle.  “Behold what manner of love the 
Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of God”.  That is the manner of the love.  We are children of God.  He is our Father.  It is the manner of the love the 
Father has bestowed upon us.  What is the consequence?  The world does not know us: I say to myself, No one knows me here, and I am content to be unknown, for I am well know
n up there.  Are you content to be well known there and unknown here?  The Lord Jesus was well known there, but nobody knew Him here.  He was only the carpenter’s son in the eyes of men.  Dear Christians, the Father knows us.  Are you content with this, or are you hankering after the world? It is the love of the Father makes us unworldly.  Do you want to be noticed?  Are you going to publish what you are doing?  That will not do; the blessed Lord did not do that; He was content to have His Father's approval.  “The world knoweth us not, because it knew him not”.  Who is the “Him” here?  The Lord Jesus.  Be content to be nothing and have His company.  There is always plenty of room at the bottom of the ladder.  All the scrambling is at the top.  The bottom is a very blessed place.  You get the company of Jesus there.  And he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

  I will take you now briefly to the Measure of the love.  It is in John 17: 23.  “And hast loved them
, as thou hast loved me”. That is the measure of His love.  If you can measure the love of the Father to the Son, then you can measure the love of the Father to you.

  The Lord bless this word to you, and give you understanding hearts.
_____________________
  
THREE DAYS
John 1: 7-9, 29, 35-42
      It is very interesting to notice the difference between the testimony of John the Baptist in John’s Gospel, and his testimony in the other Gospels.  The testimony is quite distinct, and is of a different character.  In Matthew 3 we have his testimony as regards Jesus: he indicates Him to be the King.  John was the greatest of all the prophets, because he pointed out the Person of whom the other prophets had spoken.  While it was a wonderful thing to speak of Him as Isaiah, David, and others had done, it was still more wonderful to point Him out as the Person of whom they had spoken.  But in the Gospel of John he is on other ground: he comes to bear witness of the Light, that all men might believe: to bear witness of the One who coming after him yet was before him - the Son of God.

  My intention is to speak of three ways in which John the Baptist bears witness to the Lord: and in these three testimonies I think I see three distinct periods in the history of every soul that gets blessing from God.  I shall call these three periods three days, because in verse 29 we have “the next day”, and again in verse 35.  I do not at all refer to the third day of chapter 2: 1, for I am not taking up the scripture in the way of interpretation, but only in order to give it an application to our souls.

  Now the first day for the soul is in verse 7: “The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might  believe”.  Light is for every man, rich or poor.  Alas! men love the darkness because their deeds are evil.  You may escape the light now, but the day is coming when you will not be able to do so.  The first day when God begins to work in a soul is when light comes in.  There is a certain analogy between the work of God in the new creation and that in the old creation.  “The earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep”.  God commenced to work, and on the first day God says, “Let there be light; and there was light”.  And that is the first action of God with a soul - to bring light in.  The first effect of light is to expose.  You cannot get blessing from God without  exposure, though there may be different measures of it.  Light makes manifest.  It you are an unconverted person, I will tell you what God must do before you are saved: He must search you.  All through John's Gospel we see two things going hand in hand, 
exposure and disclosure - man exposed and God made known.  When people came to Jesus, the first thing they found out was that 
He was light, and then that they were sinners.  You hear people say that God is love.  Quite true, but God is also light.  You can only learn the love in the light.  The light that exposes you discloses what God is; thank God for that! And let me say this to you Christians: You can only realise divine love in the light.  We have our natural thoughts of love, but God's thoughts are not as our thoughts.  These things cannot be divorced; it is in the light you learn the love.  

  Take chapter 3.  There was a man named Nicodemus: he came to Jesus by night.  His religion made him ashamed to come by day.  He came to the Son of God - the Light, and the first thing the Lord says to him is, “Ye must be born again”.  That is exposure.  If the Lord had said, You have done things you ought not, he would have admitted it, I dare say.  But the statement goes deeper than that, as John's Gospel always does.  I think that is why men hate it as they do.  If any section of scripture is hated, it is this Gospel, and the reason is because you get the deepest exposure.  “Ye must be born again”; a sentence often on our lips, but how little do we understand its deep meaning!  It is not reformation that will meet the case, but being born anew.  That is exposure.

  Nicodemus did not understand it; and the Lord gives him that beautiful figure of the brazen serpent, “As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up”.  What for?  “That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life”.  He  then  goes on  to say, “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son”.  That is disclosure.  The exposure is: “Ye must be born again”.

  Take chapter 4.  It is not here a religious sinner, but a poor immoral woman.  She comes to the well to draw water, and finds Jesus sitting there, and He is so gracious to her.  He who is over all, God blessed for ever, sits there a weary man.  He stoops to ask a drink of her!  What grace!  He will turn on the light directly, but first He will weave a web around her to make her stay in the light.  “Give me to drink”.  Think of the Son of God asking a drink of such a woman as this!  “If thou knewest the gift of God”, etc., verses 10-14.  What is that?  Disclosure.  Does she see it?  Not a bit, and why?  She has not been exposed yet.  She must learn the beauty of those words in the light which exposes her.  You cannot understand anything till you have been in the light.  “Go call thy 
husband”.  Now He is about to put the light on.
  
She says, “I have no husband”.  “Jesus said unto her, Thou hast well said, I have no husband”.  He pours the light in, but she does not run away.  If He had said this at the first, she would have been driven away.  He has won her heart by His grace; but she learns what grace is in the light.  There is disclosure, but there is also exposure.  She comes into the light, and then she gets the blessing, and when He is discovered 
to her as the Christ, she goes her way into the city and says to the men, “Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did; is not this the Christ?”  If you will come 
to Him, He will tell you all things that ever you did.  All things that ever 
you did!  
You, a wretched sinner!  Yes, I have been exposed, but He has discovered Himself to me.  Exposure and disclosure, they go hand in hand together.

  Would you like Christ to tell you all that ever you did?  You would not like the dearest friend on earth to know all you have been doing; but Jesus knows it.  It is a real moment in your  history  when you are exposed.
  
The first action of light is to distress.  Have you ever been distressed?  Did you hear of the naval manoeuvres off the Irish coast a few years ago?  If so, you will have heard about the electric searchlight.  You can imagine one of those huge ironclads brought up alongside the coast.  It is so dark you can scarcely see the length of the ship.  Orders are given to turn on the searchlight, and in a moment not the smallest thing on that vessel but is seen under its blaze.  Ah, dear friends, it is a great moment in the soul when God puts on His searchlight.  He is going to put it on full blaze one day.  The day is coming when He will expose everything, but it is a great thing to be exposed 
now.
  I now come to John 8.  The last verse of chapter 7 says: “Every man  went unto his own house”.  Chapter 8: 1: “Jesus went unto the mount of Olives”. They all had their homes to go to: the people went home to sleep; Jesus went to the mount of Olives to pray, and early in the morning was found in the temple.  And they brought a woman to Him, a terribly bad woman, and set her in His presence; they say: Here she is.  Moses says she ought to be stoned; what sayest Thou?  “Jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground”.  He was Jehovah who wrote the law.  They are quoting the law to the One who wrote it.  “When they continued asking him, he lifted up himself”; and now He puts on the searchlight: “He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her”.  John Bradford saw a poor man going to execution, and exclaimed, “There goes John Bradford but for the grace of God”.  That showed that he had been 
under the searchlight.  Now look at those Pharisees.  They went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last.  They went out to their prayers, they went out to their religion, but they went out in the dark.  Religious darkness is the worst of all.  Then He says to the woman, “Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more”.

  I now come to the second day in the soul’s history.  “The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world”.  What does that mean?  That the One who is the Light has come down to put away all that the light exposes.  The One who is the Light is also the Lamb.  He takes away the sin of the world - not sins, but sin; it is a deeper thing.  It is sin as God sees it, as God knows it.  The Lamb has come to remove it from before God, to settle for ever that great  sin  question.  Do you remember Genesis 22?  “Take thou thy son, thine only son Isaac ... and offer him ... for a burnt offering”.  “And they went both of them together”.  Precious words! twice repeated in the chapter.  I should like to write over the Gospel of John: “They went both of them together”.  Isaac said to Abraham, “Where is the lamb for a burnt offering?
”  
And Abraham replied, “God will provide himself  a lamb”.  And when he was about to take the life of his son, God arrested his hand, and he looked behind him and saw a ram caught in a thicket.  “Behind”.  I  like  that  word.  The provision was made before sin came into the world.  As that little hymn says:-

  My soul looks back to see
  The burden Thou didst bear.
  The One foreordained before the foundation of the world is pointed out by John as come to take away the sin of the world.  It is not dispensational here.  Light is for everybody; the Lamb is for every 
one.  
Light is universal: the aspect is towards all.  It is not the Jewish lamb: it is God's Lamb.

  It is very remarkable that John the Baptist should so witness.  He indicates Him here as the One come to remove what the light exposes.  The One who came to expose our sin has died on Calvary's cross to put it away.  Have you the sense in your soul that that blessed Person has for ever settled the question of your sin and your sins?  If not, look away to Him and you will know it is settled.  God will not raise the question of sin with His people.  He 
has raised it and settled it, and on the ground of what we have here, God will bring in the new heavens and the new earth.  He 
will erect on the solid basis of this verse that glorious superstructure which nothing can shake.  And I, a little atom in it - I rest there.  There is not a thing about me, not a discovery I can make, that His cross has not met.  We look back and see the Lamb in eternity, saying, “Lo, I come; in the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God”, and we look on and see that Lamb in the midst of the throne.  He could, as it were, put His hand on the volume of the book and say, 
I have done it.
  On the cross He met all the claims of the throne of God, and God has found satisfaction in the blood of the Lamb, and He is there now in the midst of the throne, a Lamb as it had been slain.  The throne that was against our sins is for us now; it is a throne of grace.  “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world”.  It is peace  to see Him there, in the midst of the throne, “a Lamb as it had been slain”.  Peace is this, that everything about you unsuitable 
to God has been met in the death of Christ.  The Light-bearer is the Sin-bearer.  With what holy delight do we contemplate it!  “And the Lamb is the light thereof”.  You could not bear the light if the Lamb were not the light thereof.

  There are two things in the second day - sin put away and the Holy Ghost given.  Verse 33:
 “The same is he which baptiseth with the Holy Ghost”.  That would make a subject in itself.  The moment you rest your soul on the work of Christ the Holy Ghost is given to dwell in you.  Just as in the case of the leper the oil was put on the right ear, the right thumb, and the right toe; but the blood was first put there.  What was the oil a type of?  The Holy Ghost.  We have been anointed with the Holy Ghost in order that we may enter into all these things.

  There are two things, then, in connection with this day  the putting away of sin, and the baptising with the Holy Ghost.  I can look up and thank God that Christ has borne everything for me; everything unsuitable to God is removed in His death; in other words, I am trusting in His blood, and if this be so, I have the Holy Ghost.  “Ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father”.  “God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father”.  There are many blessed truths that come out in connection with the gift of the Holy Ghost.

  Now we come to the third day: “The next day after, John stood, and two of his disciples; and looking upon Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God!”  He does not say anything about what He is going to do, or what He is going to give; he is looking on Him, beholding Him.  I think, if I understand this scripture aright, John the Baptist is gazing upon Jesus, his heart filled with delight, and those two men are near enough to hear his breathings as he says,  “Behold the Lamb of God!”  He presents Him as an object for their hearts.  In the second day you get salvation and the Spirit; in the third day you get satisfaction.  The One who has saved you can satisfy you.  That is what God proposes to do for us, to make our hearts deeply satisfied with Him who is the Fountain of Life.  Do you not think that the One who is going to fill your heart with satisfaction and joy for ever is competent to satisfy your heart now?  It is not what He does, it is not what He gives, but what He is.  Have you ever had a taste of it?  God would have us to know more deeply “what soon shall be our part”.  God desires it should be our part now.  If I knew it better I should be able to speak of it better.

  The second day’s testimony had no practical effect so far as we can see; there was no attaching and detaching connected with that; but the moment you get the third day's testimony they leave John and follow Jesus.  True ministry does two things: it brings the conscience into the presence of God.  and it entwines the heart around the Person of Christ.  You can always judge true ministry thus.  It is not that the mind is interested, that you have some new thoughts, but that your conscience is brought into the presence of God, and your heart is attached to Christ.

  They left John and followed Jesus.  They have a new object and a new centre.  What a wonderful thing that we can have the same object before us now that we shall have in heaven! The Lord turns and sees them following.  What is so sweet here is that we learn that He will encourage the least desire to know Him better.

  You may say, I am a poor thing; often my heart has wandered; but it is moved by this scripture, and I want to know Him better.  The Spirit of God will be with you in that desire.  He is as true to Christ as the needle to the pole, and you have power too, the capacity to enter into the third day, because you have the Holy Ghost in you.  And now, as they follow Jesus, He turns and says, “What seek ye?”  They immediately say, “Master, where dwellest thou?”

  If that be your question to-night, Where dwellest Thou? much that hinders will be discovered to you of which you are not conscious now.  In 
Canticles the bridegroom says, “Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice”.  Immediately the bride says, “Take us the foxes, the little foxes
, that spoil the vines”.  She is made conscious of these the moment he draws her into communion.  A little thing hinders communion.  “Take us the foxes”; not that we can find them, but the Lord will put His finger upon them and show us what hinders.

  Another thing is, If  you take up this question, “Where dwellest thou?” you must learn His cross.  He says, “Come and see”.  You will have to leave earth to find heaven.  Is that difficult to you?  You say, I understand I shall have to leave earth to have heaven when I die.  That is not it; but in spirit you leave earth to have heaven 
now.  
I believe that is what the Lord indicates to us here.
  “They came and saw where he dwelt, and abode with him that day: for it was about the tenth hour”.  They abode with Him the whole day, “and they came and saw”.  This is the key to the whole gospel.  “Where dwellest thou?”  “No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him”.  He dwells in the bosom of the Father.  “Come and see”, He says.  Do you know what it is to dwell there?  There is a reality about that.  He never left the bosom of the Father, the Father's affections
6.  It is a condition, not a position.

  John says (John 1: 14), “And we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father”.  They beheld Him as the object of the Father's heart.  Then in his first epistle John says, “That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ”.  And again, “These things write we unto you,  that your joy may be full”.  What is a full cup for the Christian?  To abide in the love of the Son and of the Father.  Very often we get trials, and we may say, like the little hymn, “Blest be the sorrow, kind the storm, that drives us nearer home”.  No storm did that for Jesus.  He was always in the Father's love, and He is saying to you, “Come and see”.  We see in verses 41, 42 that the 
dwellers are the finders, and the satisfied ones are the servers.  
The Lord grant that we may be there, coming out in our little way and saying, “Come and see”.  The woman of chapter 
4. could say, “Come and see”.  The Lord grant that we may know this third day better, this abiding with the Father and the Son, that our joy may be full.

_____________________

THE PRESENT TRIUMPH OF THE GOSPEL
Mark 14: 9
  I have read this verse to introduce my subject.  No doubt you are familiar with the circumstances that led to this remark of the Lord.  It is His comment on the act of this woman.  It is recorded three times - in Matthew, Mark, and John.  The Lord says, “Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also that she hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her”.  Why should the act of this woman be thus recorded?  For many years I could not have given you a reason, but I think I can now.  The reason why this should be told is because it presents to us the 
present triumph of the gospel.  We limit the thought of the gospel too much.  Christians need the gospel.  I do not say they need a gospel to take them to heaven, but they need a gospel to deliver them while here.  You think, perhaps, that the triumph of the gospel is to snatch a brand from the burning, and to place that one in glory with Christ.  All that is quite true, but it is not the present triumph of the gospel, and it is not the point of this passage.

  I am taking it for granted that every Christian here has the assurance the gospel gives as to the future - that if you departed hence this moment it would be well with you.  That is a good thing.  Many have not reached it.  But that is not the 
present triumph of the gospel?  What is the present triumph of the gospel?  I beg you to weigh it.  It is to make you 
forget yourself and think of Another.  
That is the proposal of the gospel.  It gives me an object outside myself.  The action of this woman sets it forth.  She takes that which might have given her distinction in the eyes of others.  She  had gathered her pence  together;  she  takes the ointment she had purchased, and, led by the instincts of affection, lavishes it on this blessed One.  I think this sets forth the present triumph of the gospel, and therefore the Lord commends it in this way.

  The assurance that you will go to heaven when you die will not make you happy for the present; we need another aspect of the gospel that will set us free from ourselves and occupy us with Another.  The gospel will produce this: it will place you in the company of this woman.

  What I desire to set before you is, first, the necessity of deliverance, then the way of deliverance, and finally the effect of deliverance.  I trust it will be made clear to you by the Spirit.

  I will now read a passage in chapter 11 of this gospel, verses 1-9.  I have chosen this scripture to illustrate my subject.  I suppose you are familiar with Exodus 13, where God puts the firstling of an 
ass and the firstborn of man together.  When we come to scripture we do not find ourselves flattered by the company we are put into; we are humiliated, and it leads to blessing if we accept it.

  The firstling of an ass had to be redeemed with a lamb, or else its neck had to be broken; it could only live on the ground that the lamb had died.
  I now turn to a passage in Mark 11: 2-5.  We see the colt tied.  Here I see a picture of myself.  I look at that colt and say, Why is that colt alive?  Because the lamb had died for it, otherwise God had said its neck was to be broken, but there it is.  I believe as to the strict interpretation of this passage that it has reference to
 Israel, but the same thing applies in principle to us.  The colt was allowed to
 live because the lamb had died.  That is, the judgment of God rested upon us, but the Son of God took it in our stead.
  
He died and we live.  
That is the first thing you are sensible of: the Lamb has died for you, and you live; because He has gone through the judgment, you will never have to bear it.
  What is the next thing?  The Lamb who died for you is the 
Lord to guide you.  
If the lamb died for the colt, the Lord must sit on it; it is to be for the Lord’s pleasure.  That is what you are set free for.  “The Lord hath need of him”.  I ask you, Do you acknowledge His claim?  He claims you because He died for you.  Do you answer, Yes, the 
Lamb that redeemed me is the Lord to control me henceforth?
  There is no such thing as salvation apart from the acknowledgment of the lordship of Christ.  It  is, “Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved”.  I feel how necessary it is to press the claims of the Lord, for it is as we recognise His claims and desire to answer to them, that we feel the need of deliverance.  The reason people do not get deliverance is because they do not feel their need of it, and the reason they do not feel their need of it is because they do not own the Lord’s claims; they are not conscientious; it is the laxity of the age; the gospel is preached so much as relief.  There 
is relief, I admit, but connected with it is the lordship of Christ.  The scripture reads: “If we believe on him that raised up Jesus 
our Lord from the dead”.  It is not believing a text.  I do not think any person has ever been saved through merely believing a 
text.  
You have to believe God, the One of whom the text speaks.  There is a very great difference.  
“To whom it shall be imputed” - righteousness shall be imputed - “believing” (it should be) “on him that raised up Jesus our Lord”.  You are introduced to 
God, and the testimony of God points you to Jesus our Lord.  You may think this is a very simple thing to bring before you, but it is most important.

  Let me quote another passage: “If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus” (or “Jesus as Lord”, as it should read), “and believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved”.  There you get the two things - the confession of the lordship of Christ, and salvation.  With the mouth confession is made unto salvation, with the heart man believeth unto righteousness: Jesus is confessed as 
your Lord.
  Let me give you a case in scripture, because I am anxious about this point.  You remember how Saul of Tarsus was on his way to Damascus with a high hand, and with authority to persecute those who called on the name of the Lord; how he was arrested by the light from heaven that struck him to the ground, and how he heard the voice of Jesus saying, “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?”  Now I want you to notice what he says when he learns who it is that speaks to him: “
Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?”  He owns Jesus as Lord.  He has not peace yet, but he has come under the sway of the Lord.

  Perhaps you say, What has this to do with deliverance?  It lies at the very root of the matter.  If there was a sense of the lordship of Christ, the need of deliverance would be felt, and it would then be sought.  Just come back to Saul:  he goes into Damascus and spends three days and three nights without food and without sight.  Is he happy?  No; he goes down in overwhelming distress.  What is the matter?  He has owned Jesus as Lord, but he has discovered within him a principle that 
will not go that way.  
The man who has led a blameless life has discovered that.  Now you are on the road to deliverance.  You 
must learn that lesson, and you will never be happy or do a single thing for Christ's glory till you have learnt it.  It is the recognition of the Lord's claims that needs to be pressed.

  The next point is, you want to please the Lord.  To put it in a simple way, you say, I own His love and desire to do His will, but have not an atom of power.  What shall I do?  That is terrible anguish for a soul! Not to have power to please the one you love, that is agony.
  
Have you ever passed through that?  There was anguish in the thought of possibly going 
to hell, but that is all settled now; it is not that you cannot go to heaven, but oh, the anguish of learning this lesson of one's own powerlessness for good that there is in one a principle that will not go God's way!
  The first four chapters of Romans would have been sufficient for one who had gone to heaven the day he was converted, but if he lives he needs a gospel to teach him how to live.  We think we only want a gospel that will take us to heaven; we really need a gospel to teach us how we should live on earth, to make us happy while we are here.  This is the great need; it is not a question of people going to heaven, that is not the trouble, but they are not happy because they are not clear of this evil principle that will not go the Lord's way.

  It is not knowing the doctrine; you may know the doctrine as clear as noonday, but you must take the journey.  
It is possible for a man to get up and lecture on deliverance, and not be in the good of it himself.  We must experimentally take the journey, and there is a very blessed end to the journey.

  You say, perhaps: You have described my case exactly.  Will you now tell me what will set me clear of myself?  Come then to the twelfth verse of this beautiful chapter (11).  The verse before this is very touching.  The Lord had entered into Jerusalem, and into the temple, and had looked round upon all things, and when evening came had gone out to Bethany.  The temple was the religious sphere of the Jew - of man in the flesh.  He would not stay in the temple; He would not even sleep in the city where the temple was.  The next day, coming from Bethany, he saw a fig tree.  He was hungry, and seeing a fig tree He came to it, if haply He might find anything thereon; and when He came to it, He found nothing but leaves.  And then He says, “No man eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever”.  “And in the morning
, as they passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots”.  
When Peter calls attention to it, the Lord answers, “Have faith in God”.  If I can only convey to you what is in this passage, I shall be glad, for it is a most interesting and helpful scripture.  The Lord came seeking fruit for God.  “He was hungry” - really it means He was hungering for something for God.  But He did not find it.  That tree sets forth man under culture - Israel, if you like, but our history is in it, for in the history of Israel you get the history of man after the flesh.  What is to be done?  God has looked for fruit from man in the flesh, and found none.  My friends, have you got hold of that?  If so, the next thing is to know God's judgment 
of it; you have to learn first what that man is, and the character of that man who will not go God's way, and then the judgment of God that is on him.  God will prove to you the 
necessity of the cross.  
In that cross God has pronounced His judgment on that which troubles you.  “No man eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever”.  “They saw the fig tree dried up 
from the roots”. Withered, WITHERED - God has withered it.  It was God’s act.  The man after the flesh has been blasted by the judgment of God.

  Peter called his Master's attention to it, but the Lord, in effect, says: I will never look that way again. You may look that way and get your disappointments, but God will never look that way.  He has done with it.  If that is not good news to you, I do not know what will be.  If you have learnt in anguish of soul what that fig tree is, if you have had a sickening of yourself, what a relief it is to know that God has done it!  It is an immense help to accept God's judgment of it.

  How then did God judge it, and where did He judge it?  Look at the third verse of Romans 8: “For what the law could not do, in that it was weak 
through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh”.  Look at that verse, and do not think as you do so that you know all about it.  Do you know the relief of that verse?  The law could not produce anything for God from the flesh.  It was “holy, just, and good”; but it was weak to produce anything for God “through the flesh”.  Here comes in the gospel - God sent His 
own Son!  Look at the cost of it.  He sends His 
own Son.  
What to do?  First of all to be in the likeness of sinful flesh - wondrous grace! - and then as a sacrifice for sin to 
condemn sin in the flesh.  
When God made Him to be sin - when God made His sinless Son to be sin for us - He condemned sin in the flesh.  That is how and where God withered it up.  Do you know what it is to have the relief of that?  Do you think any one can know that who has not really felt what the flesh is?

  In Romans 7: 22 we see one who loved the law of God after the inward man, but was powerless to fulfil it.  Let me say there are three ways of learning our badness.  First by the 
practice of evil.  
This is the most superficial way; that is to say, a man has been into all the mud and filth of this world, and because of this he knows what his badness is; but it is a mistake to think that he knows more about it than the person who has been outwardly moral.  The second way we learn our badness is by the 
effort to be good; that is Romans 7 - the effort to be good, without object or power.  The third and most effectual way is in the 
presence of perfect goodness, and this is without a bit of anguish.  You learn it in the presence of that blessed One who is 
before God's face for ever.  
The more we learn His perfections, the more we learn the true character of the flesh by way of contrast, and we get distanced from the man here.  But let me come back to my point.  The tree is withered 
from the root right up.  
Well indeed for us that it is so.  It is a gospel fact that God has condemned sin in the flesh, and it cannot be altered.
  
This gives me a title to turn from myself to Christ.  How could we turn from ourselves if God had not done so?  It would be ignoring the question, not settling it.  Peter could say, “Master, behold
, the fig tree!” but the Lord says, as it were, No, I will never look that way again; I have done with it.  Have faith in God.  You will need to have faith in God to be off the ground of the responsible man.  What I mean is, that on the cross God pronounced His unalterable judgment of that tree; and the condemnation is absolute.  If you know the badness of that tree, what a blessed thing it is for you to know that God has judged it, and you are entitled to have done with it.

  On what ground does the Spirit of God dwell in us? “After that ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise”.  We have the Holy Ghost dwelling in us if we are Christians, if we have believed the truth of the gospel.  The Spirit of God will never leave you; and yet you have in you - not that you are 
in it, but you have in you - a principle as opposed to the Spirit of God as hell is to heaven!  That is not a bit too strong.  On what ground then can the Spirit of God dwell in you?  God has condemned the flesh in the cross, and we are not in it, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in us: we are in a new state.

  I want to show you the wonderful work effected for you.  I need not look the way of that tree any more.  God is not looking that way; He never will; He will not regard it for a moment.

  I will now turn to some other passages to show you the effects of deliverance, and first to Psalm 41: 12.  Mark the simple words that begin the passage.  “As for me”.  That is contrast.  It is in contrast with the fig tree.  “As for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and 
settest me before thy face for ever”.  
One's heart thrills with pleasure at the thought of it.  There is a Man who is, for God's satisfaction, set before His face for ever, and He will never turn from Him.  I read that passage hundreds of times, but one day the Spirit of God showed me that “As for me” was in 
contrast with “the children of men”.
  The great lesson of the First Book of Psalms is that God has found His ideal man.  He has found Him morally and in resurrection.  That righteous Man traces His way through this sad world where we have our histories, and at the end is found in death.  I do not go into the way He is found there - Psalm 40 gives it to us;  it was for the establishment of the counsels of God.  But now He is set before God's face for ever.  I will give you a New Testament passage for it.  “In that he died, he died unto sin once; but in that he liveth, he 
liveth unto God”.  
He lives to God in resurrection.  Resurrection is brought out in the First Book of Psalms.  He traces His way through this world.  All that a man should be for God was found in Him, without a flaw.  His righteousness was to seek the glory of the Father who sent Him. That is righteousness.  We have 
our thoughts about it, but we have such poor moral sensibilities, we must get near to Jesus to know what sin is, and what righteousness is.  Our thought is that it is to pay twenty shillings in the pound.  That only touches the fringe.  Christian morality, if we may use such an
 expression, goes far beyond that.  “He that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no 
unrighteousness is in him”.  The moment you have your own glory before you, you are positively unrighteous to Christ.  That blessed One pursued His way through this world to God's pleasure.  He lived here for His satisfaction and joy, and He went to Calvary’s cross and died for us.  “In that he died, he died unto sin once”.  He who lived a perfectly holy life here died to sin.  Why?  Because He took our place.  That righteous One died to sin once.  “But in that he liveth, he liveth unto God”. Can you afford to forget yourself, and think of another, and find pleasure in the fact that God has found a Man to satisfy Him? My point is not what 
we have found, but that God has found a Man for His eternal satisfaction.
  You say, I should like to be a better Christian.  Yes, you would like to be satisfied with yourself.  I ask you this, and your answer will prove whether you know anything of deliverance: Does it not delight your heart that God has found a Man to His satisfaction, a Man to suit Him?  He has turned His face to 
that Man, and He will never look away from Him.
  Now look at the next Psalm.  
“Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted in me?”  You say, Ah! that is where I come in.  When are you cast down and disquieted? When you look to that tree.  Selfoccupation is the bane of your life.  The eye is turned away from 
Christ.  You are cast down and disquieted when you look in upon yourself.  May God enable you to turn from it!  “Hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him” - gleams of hope.  Is that Christianity, little gleams of sunshine streaming in?  No!  Christianity is to bask in the sunshine.

  Now look at Psalm  43: 3, another remarkable verse: “Send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me”.  Where can light and truth come from?  Light and truth are found in the One who is set before God's face for ever.  A remark made here by another a few months ago, helped me as to this scripture.  He was speaking of some one in danger of falling over a precipice through having lost his way in a dark night.  A light streaming from a mansion crosses his path, and he sees the precipice and is saved.  You say, What a grand thing that light was! it saved him from destruction; but that light shines on his pathway in order that he may reach the place whence the light comes.  That light shining on your path is conversion.
  
But  where does it lead to?  You say, Thank God, I am saved from judgment!  That is good, but wait a bit.  “Send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me; let them bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy 
tabernacles”.  
The fulness of the gospel is that you have reached the place from which the light and truth came; it will lead you to His tabernacles.  And what do you find there?  The Man who lives to God's pleasure set before His face for ever; and we are accepted in Him.
  
Do you wonder at the bride saying, in Canticles, “Look not upon me, because I am black”?  That is what we are in Adam.  But in chapter 2 she says, “I am the rose of Sharon, and the lily of the valley”.  And He answers, “As the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters”.  He says, as it were, It will be my joy to take you out of the thorns and put you in my bosom for ever.  It is a blessed thing to reach that point, to see that Christ lives to God's pleasure, set before His face for ever, and to know that you are in His beauty before God.  You can be at home with Him; you know that you are suitable to Him.  You lose yourself; 
you are gone; and Christ fills your soul, You are invested with the beauty of that blessed One in whom the light and truth are.
  If every saint knew that he was invested with the beauty of Christ, he would be set free from himself.  What meetings we should have if every saint had reached that point!  “He that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one!”  You are in His beauty in order that you may enjoy the perfect revelation of God in Him.  You cannot get beyond that.  “We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ”.  “Then will I go unto the 
altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy”.  How can God be your exceeding  joy until you are suitable to Him?  Have you reached that spot where all speaks  of  God?  “Send out  thy  light and thy truth ... let  them  bring me ... to 
thy tabernacles”.  What Christ is as man to God, we are made;
 and all that God is to us, He is in that blessed Person, for He is God.  
“In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in him”.  Let the light shine brighter and brighter; it will only discover the beauty of Christ.  Now you have reached the region of satisfied desire.  I am not conscious of a single want when Christ fills the vision, and I have no need to look at or think of myself.

  Now see Psalm 45.  Here we have the language of a delivered  soul.  “My  heart is inditing a good matter: I speak of the things which I have made 
touching the king”.  
The effect of deliverance is that Christ is our theme.  Our hearts  must  be inditing something.  Oftentimes our hearts are inditing, “Why art thou cast down, O my soul?” but our proper theme is, “My heart is inditing a good matter: I will speak of the things which I have made touching the king”.  Many times I have said,  Lord, let me preach like that.  Getting up sermons, or points, will not do.  Get near to Christ and the tongue will go.  “My  tongue is the pen of a ready writer”.  The moment the heart is filled with Christ, the tongue will speak.  And what will it say?  Not, “Why art thou cast down?” but “Thou art fairer than the children of men”.

  Now we have reached the woman of Mark 14.  Her action says, “Thou art fairer than the children of men”.  She has found an object and lost herself.  You can see the difference between ministering truths and ministering 
Christ.  
We must be under the full control of the Spirit to minister Christ.
  Let me quote a passage very much misunderstood: “Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory”.  Now mark: “Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls”. Receiving 
soul salvation.  You say, That means that my soul is saved from hell.  No, not that.  Your soul needs saving from 
present things.  
Who can give it?  Only Christ.  “
Whom  
having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory: receiving”, etc.  We received the saving of our souls, in a way, the moment we believed on Christ but this scripture goes beyond that.  You 
want salvation in the sense of being saved from the power of present things; and this is what is proposed as the present triumph of the gospel.
  The effect of deliverance is beautifully set forth in 2 Samuel, chapter 23.  “These be the last words of David”.  “Although my house be not so with God, yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my 
salvation, and all my desire”.  
His eye is now fixed on Christ.  Some people reach this point when dying, and then there is what is called a 
‘bright death-bed’.  I want a bright and happy 
course; it is not a question of the end, it is now.  
On a death-bed people give up everything that has been hindering them, and then they reach it.  It ought to have been reached years before.  No doubt it is often so because of the poor way the gospel is preached.  Why not give up the things that hinder 
now, and have a bright and happy life?
  Learning what you are produces brokenness of spirit in you.
  That is what we want.  
It is a great thing to be broken.      

_____________________

“TO”, “BY” and “IN”
Romans 6; 7 and 8
  There is one aspect of the gospel that shows us how we can be in heaven at the end, and another that teaches us how to live here.  Because we do not go to heaven the moment we believe, we need these chapters to teach us how we can be here for God.  There are two sides to the gospel.  After you are converted you may live here for twenty, thirty, or forty years, and you want the aspect of the gospel which bears upon that. 
 You cannot live on the happiness of going to heaven.  If we went to heaven directly we believe, we should not need that side of the gospel which is set forth in Romans 6, 7, and 8.  This teaches us how to live, and if we do not pay attention to it we shall not be happy.  The reason people are not happy is because they do not know the gospel that teaches them how to live here.  The road to present happiness is to live to God.  If you do not live to God you will not be happy.

  If you want to see this coming out in practice, you will find it in the second chapter of Philippians.  You are to work out your own salvation because it is God that works in you, both to 
will and to do of His good pleasure.  It is the 
willing and the doing of His good pleasure that is your happiness.
  I think we may connect three prepositions with these three chapters (Rom. 6, 7, and 8): chapter 6 is “To”, “to God”;  chapter 7 is “By”, “by Christ”; chapter 8 is “In”, “in the Spirit”.

  After you believe you receive the Spirit, then you are in the Spirit.  The power lies in the Spirit, but you must have all three; if you live to God, it is by the Spirit's power, but then you must have the support of Christ.  “From me is thy fruit found”.
  
You are not occupied with the Spirit.
  The first six verses of chapter 7 give us the “by”.  
In chapter 8 you have the Spirit; you are so identified with the Spirit that you are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit.  This is your 
power to live.
  Cornelius and his friends listened and believed, and received the remission of sins and the gift of the Spirit.  It is a great thing to be established in the gospel.  It is God who speaks in the gospel.  Have you believed on Him, that is, God, who raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead?  There is then not a single charge; you are as clear of every charge 
of sin as Christ is.  Then you come to this:
 you have the Spirit.  On what ground could the Spirit dwell in me, when there is in me a principle as opposite to the Spirit as hell is to heaven? 
 Only on the ground of the death of Christ - which is the answer to everything in yourself that is evil.  The Spirit dwelling in me does not depend upon my conduct, but on the work of Christ.  If it depended on me, I should lose it many times a day.

  Having the Spirit, you know how bad you are.  He does not occupy you with it, but He gives you the sense that it is of such a character that you cannot trust it; but you are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit.  There is complete identification with the Spirit; there 
ought to be practical identification: that will come out of it.
  I am endeavouring to show you the consequence of having the Spirit.  The Spirit is never put before me as an 
object7.  
The Spirit is in me, and I am in the Spirit.  I know how it is with some of you; you begin to think of your practice  how much you realise it, and so on.  But you must know your income before you can spend it.  See that you 
have it first.  Let your eye rest on verse 3 of chapter 8 of Romans; that is the gospel for 
you; it is the condemnation of sin in the flesh - God sending His own Son.  
You get that twice in Romans.  The law addresses itself to man in the flesh;  it sought to produce fruit to God, but no fruit ever came.  What will God do?  Condemn sin in the flesh.  With what result?  That the righteous requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.  The Spirit dwells in me to make that good in me practically.  The only way of being happy now is to live to God.

  What I see is, people like to know that when they die they will go to heaven, but they want to do their own will in the meantime.  To do your own will is to be wretched.  There is no difference then, practically, between you and an unconverted man.  If you are doing your own will, you are not walking in the Spirit.  You come to the Lord's supper.  And you make the Lord’s supper a gospel-meeting to assure you that all will be right when you die.  You use it to assure yourself that you have a precious Saviour who died for you, and that on that ground you will go to
 heaven when you die.  
The Lord's supper is not for that.
  We have been working on the preposition “in”.  
That is the subjective side.  Now let us come to the “by”.
  
This teaches us where our support is.  You are freed from the law that you might be to Another in order to
 bring forth fruit to God.  This is the objective side.  You must put all three 
chapters together to know how to live.  It is in the Spirit, but it is by Christ.  A young man said the other day, 
‘In my conflicts I am always getting floored’.  
He was learning his weakness.  
I will tell you what has been a comfort to me; you may think it a curious scripture: “Gad, a troop shall overcome him; but he shall overcome at the last”.  
Hold on; do not give up.  “He shall overcome 
at the last”.  
The reason you are floored is because you cannot do without the support of Christ.  You cannot bring forth fruit unto God unless you are dependent upon Him.  It is “by Christ”.
  
You are supported by another in the measure in which you are dependent on Him, and you are only in dependence on Him as you distrust yourself.
  If you are occupied with yourself, it shows you have not learnt your own weakness fully.  You are not looking 
to Christ.
  You are overcome to teach you where your strength lies; but do not be discouraged.  
“He shall overcome at the last”.  “I have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong”.  That is, the young men are in the good of deliverance.  Why does he say, “Ye are strong”? Because they know where strength is - that is, in Christ.  “And the word of God abideth in you”.
  
That is, God's will rules you instead of your own.  You have the word of God abiding in you, and you  know  where  strength  is;  you  are  dependent.
  
The wicked one cannot touch you.  I know in days past I would have given my right hand for any one to help me as to that.  By being overcome you fear to trust yourself, and a very good thing too.

  Now look at chapter 7: 4.  There is your support.  Chapter 7 is a remarkable chapter, because its structure is very much like the structure of the Psalms.  The first two or three verses give you the conclusion arrived at, and the remainder shows you what led to the conclusion.  Take Psalm 73 for example: “Truly God is good to Israel … But as for me, my feet were almost gone”; and then the Psalmist records the experience he went through to reach “Truly God is good to Israel”.
  
So in Romans 7, from the seventh verse to the end is the journey the soul takes to reach what is in the first six verses.  “O wretched man that I am!  Who shall deliver me?”  “I  thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord”.
  
Do you see the journey the soul takes to reach that point?  A troop shall overcome him; but he shall overcome at the last”.
  
He says, I love the good, but I cannot do it; what shall I do?  He is learning there what we all 
must learn: that there is no good thing in the flesh.  And he learns to disown himself, to treat the flesh 
as a foreign thing, and what to do with it he does not know.  Christ alone can deliver you.  What characterised the law was demand.  But the law produced no fruit for God.  It was weak through the flesh.  Every bit of fruit from you for God comes by Christ.  “From me is thy fruit found”.
  
So if I see a bit of fruit in you, I say it came from Christ; I do not credit you with it, and the sooner you learn that the better.  “Ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ”.
  
The Spirit of God identifies you with His dying in order that you may be identified with Him in His living.  
But we want to see how this works out practically.  I know something of it doctrinally, but I want to know the practical power of it, otherwise I have nothing.

  I have endeavoured to show you that “in” is the Spirit and “by” is Christ.  The Spirit shows you what you 
are in Christ before you are exhorted to do anything.  I must know 
what I am in order to be it.  I am “alive to God in Christ Jesus”.
  
You must not, in one sense you cannot, divorce yourself from Christ.  The Lord says: “
Without me ye can do nothing”.
  A sailor, if he is a good steersman, will always seek some object outside the ship by which to steer her, when once he has got her head right by the compass.  The compass is generally sluggish, and the ship moves somewhat from her proper course before it is affected, and the result of seeking to steer exclusively by it is that you make a zig-zag path.

  When I was a sailor, I met with men sometimes who tried to steer in this way, and I would say to them, ‘What is the matter?  You are not steering  straight
’.  
‘It is the compass, sir’, would be the reply, and I would tell them it was no use trying to steer straight in that way, by the compass only.  They must watch some object outside the ship, a star, for instance, if by night, and by that means detect the smallest movement of the ship long before the compass was affected.  So with us: it is Christ before us that makes us sensitive.  I have to go on through this world, and for this I must have my eye on an object outside myself.  One evidence is that you know you are corrupt is that you do not  talk about yourself.  But we do not fully know our badness.
  
The nearer we are to God the better we understand that self is a corrupt thing.
  I knew a very interesting person who said: ‘I believe every bit of sin will be extracted from me, and I will not rest until it is’.  I replied, 
‘You will get into dreadful error on that line’.  And so she did.  I shall not need 
to watch and pray in heaven, I shall not have sin in the flesh there.  Would you not like Christ to triumph 
now in you and by you?  What is His present triumph?  That you, in the power of the Spirit, keep in the silence of death that which 
He died to.  You hold yourself to have died to sin and to be alive to God.  That is by Christ.  It is His present triumph; His future triumph will be to take us clean out of it.

  You have Christ before you now instead of yourself; you are realising life, and in the realisation of life the body is held as dead.  Life is in Christ; you must first know you are in Him before you can live by Him.  This is the way of happiness.
  
“He shall overcome at the last”.
  People are often disappointed and distressed at the little progress they make, but we are not to be occupied with fruit, but with the Person by whom it is produced.  We are too much occupied with ourselves - we  want to be nice Christians, and so on.  That is self; we want to be pleased with ourselves.  What you need is to enjoy Christ, and then you will be a nice Christian; but you will not be thinking about that.  When we are so occupied it is in order that 
we may have the credit of it; there is no fruit to God.  If we are looking to Christ, enjoying Him, dependent upon Him, the fruit will come.  Love is the spring of holiness.  You will not be conscious of the fruit, but of that link of affection between you and Christ.  

  Read the second of Philippians and see how this comes out in practice.  You see deliverance in Paul, Timothy, and Epaphroditus; they have lost sight of themselves and are thinking of Christ and of His interests.  Chapter 2 is greater than chapter 3, because it is the life of Jesus lived out here.  It begins with the Lord: “Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus”; He was here for the will of God.  Then the apostle says: “God ... worketh 
in you both to willo and to do of his good pleasure”, and it is really wonderful how the Spirit of God can produce in men of like passions with ourselves what was seen perfectly in Christ.  It is the result of deliverance.  If you want to be happy, it must be in this way.

_____________________

DEVOTEDNESS  TO  CHRIST

1 Samuel 18: 1-5; 2 Samuel 1: 25-27
  I desire to bring before you, as the Lord shall help me, the subject of devotedness to Christ, as set forth in the history of Jonathan.  I shall briefly refer to some of the salient points from chapter 17 and onwards.

  It is a very important subject.  Devotedness is what the Lord is looking for, and has ever looked for, from His people.  He cares for their affections.  He is very jealous over the state of their hearts.
  
May He give us to realise it!
  Turn first to Revelation 2.  The Lord in this scripture is presented, as you well know, as one walking in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks.  He is viewed here in a judicial aspect, and it is very necessary for us to understand it.  While we are quite sure of His love, it is important that we take in the way He is looked at here: “His eyes were as a flame of fire”.
  
Nothing can escape His scrutiny.  “All things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him 
with whom we have to do”.  
He has eyes as a flame of fire, and His voice is as a trumpet.  “He that hath ears to hear, let him hear”.
  

  We have here what suits Him and what does not suit Him.  
We need not be afraid of His scrutiny; for, although it is a very solemn thing, whatever He may discover does not alter His love.  In the first church He addresses, there was much that He could approve of; but one thing was lacking: “Nevertheless, I have [not ‘somewhat’] against thee, because thou hast left thy first love”.

  They had left their first love.  The Lord could look through all their works, and see that there was something lacking.  You will remember that this was the church to which the Apostle Paul unfolded such wondrous truth.  The Lord seems to be saying to them here, You have forgotten that you had a letter sent to you, and you have forgotten the prayer in that letter: “For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ ... that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith 
… and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge”.  
The Lord is saying, as it were, You have neglected that prayer; you have left your first love; I am not dwelling in your hearts.  
We may be going on in a routine and the heart cold towards Christ.  The Ephesians  were getting away  from the Lord; the centre was wrong, and therefore the circumference must be wrong too.  Their works were not connected with love to Christ.

  This is not merely a history; it is a picture.  God puts His word together with moral intention, and gives us pictures.  Just as in speaking to a child a picture of an animal would give it a better idea of the creature than a full description, so God stoops to present His truth to us in pictures.

  We shall look at Jonathan in two ways: first he shall be to us as an example, and, secondly, he shall be a warning.  I want to
 say this especially to you young Christians.  I take it that you all wish to be devoted to Christ.  The measure of your devotedness will be according to the measure in which you apprehend His devotedness to you.  You cannot be devoted by 
effort.  
The moment you try to love Him you are off Christian ground.  It is all summed up in one verse in John's first epistle: “We love him, because he first loved us”.
  
The law says, “Thou shalt love”.  
It  
demands love, but it never produces love.  Grace brings love to me and produces love in me.  The measure of your love to
 Christ is according to the measure in which you apprehend His love to you.
  You remember John 11, when sickness and sorrow had entered that house at Bethany, how the Lord went to them and brought back to those sisters the brother they mourned for.  In that chapter He makes Martha and Mary His object.  He does something for them.  That bereavement and sorrow is the way the Son of God displays what He is.  Mary, the one who sat at His feet in Luke 10, has revealed to her that He, the Son of God, is superior to death.  Then in chapter 12 they make Him their object.  They make Him a feast because they have learnt how He has made them His object.

  In 1 Samuel 17 Jonathan is David's object.  It answers to John 11.  It is a picture of Jesus in His devoted love going down into the dark valley of death, and there meeting that terrible foe - Satan.  “That through death he might destroy him that had the power of death; that is, the devil”.
  
There are two hosts in this chapter, the host of Israel and the host of the Philistines; and out of the latter comes a man who, for forty days, defies the people of Israel.  He sets forth Satan.  There is not one in the host of Israel that can meet him.  Their hearts are filled with fear.  What is to be done?

  We are then taken to Bethlehem, and see David and his father Jesse.  Jesse says, “Take now for thy brethren an ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp to thy brethren”.
  
It is a picture of God sending His Son into this world.  David comes to the camp to see how his brethren fare.  He is rejected by his brethren, even as Jesus was; but he goes on.  It is a picture of Jesus in His devoted love to you.  You must look at this first.  David goes forth to meet Goliath.  He has been winning secret victories with God in the desert before this.  Now he comes out to win his public victory.  You cannot win public victories if you do not win private victories alone with God.  He had delivered his sheep out of the paw of the lion and the bear.  It was through dependence on the Lord alone that he had done it.
  
He was a man of faith.
  He refuses Saul's armour - natural resource.  He goes down to the brook, and takes five smooth stones.  Then he goes forth to meet Goliath.  He takes one stone and slings it.  Goliath lies stretched upon the ground.  Then David ran and stood upon the Philistine and drew his own sword and cut off the giant's head with it.  That is - “that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death”.
  
He won a great victory.  There is not a thing the Lord Jesus has not met down in that dark valley.  He has spoiled principalities and powers.

  Now David comes up with the head of Goliath in his hand and the people shout a great shout.  Their fear is gone.  Is there an unsettled soul here?  I pray you look down into the valley of death and see how the Lord has met every question.  You must be established in that before you can know anything of devotedness to Christ. You must know what relief from the pressure of death is.

  Next we come to the question, Who is the person who has won the victory?  Saul says to Abner, “Whose son is this youth?”  “Enquire thou whose son the stripling is”.
  
“Whose son art thou?”  Mark how chapter 18 begins, “When he had made an end of speaking,… the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David”.
  
Not when he had made an end of Goliath, but when he had made an end of speaking.  It is a great thing to know the 
One who has won the victory and to know Him where He is, not merely to know that the victory has been won.
  We are now in the life of the One who settled all in that dark valley.  “In that he liveth, he liveth unto God.  Likewise reckon ye yourselves ... alive  unto God through Jesus
 Christ”.  
There is only one life for God and only  one object.  What  happened  to Jonathan?  He lost himself and got a better self.  “Jonathan loved him as his own soul”.

  Next you have the effect of this.  Jonathan strips himself for this object.  He who by natural right is heir to the throne strips himself, makes a fool of himself as people would say, strips himself of all, “even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle”; all that would give him importance in the eyes of men, all comes off for David.

  It is the same sort of stripping, in principle, that you get in Philippians 3.  It is not the bad things, but the things that would give distinction.  Paul is our New Testament Jonathan, only he did not break down as Jonathan did.  He is our example to the end of the chapter.  In Philippians 3 he is set forth as one devoted to his object.

  May I say that king Saul was physically what Saul of Tarsus was morally - head and shoulders above the rest?  “If any other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more”.
  
It is first the natural then the spiritual; king Saul was just the man men would choose, and so was Saul of Tarsus in his unconverted days.  Paul enumerates his privileges and acquirements, “circumcised the eight day; ... touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless”.
  
He says: I was all that, and the things that were gain to me, “those I counted loss for Christ”.  
Would you not like to have your heart won like that?  Our New Testament Jonathan says: “I am crucified with Christ
: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me”.  
Christ in him for life, and the Son of God before him as his object.  “Who loved me, and gave himself for me”.
  
That was the secret of all that outward life of his, of all that he went through.  He “loved him as his own soul”; the Son of God had captured his heart.  Has He captured yours?  Can you say, The Son of God is the One I love, and I yield myself without reserve to Him?

  We will now look at some of the other points in the history.  Turn to chapter 19: 1: “And Saul spake to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that they should kill David”.
  
How Saul's heart must have been filled with hatred to David!  Saul was a religionist, remember.  The mere religionist always hates Christ.  The Saul party is a large one in the present day.  You see them in the Gospels.  It was the Saul party who would not go into the judgment-hall lest they should be defiled, but they 
did not mind hating and crucifying their Messiah.  The Saul party hate Christ.  They are the bulls of Bashan (Psalm 22).  If you speak to
 a cold religionist about Christ, he will treat you with scorn.
  The more David is hated by Saul, the more he is loved by Jonathan.  “But Jonathan ... delighted much in David”.
  
It reminds me of the woman in Matthew 26.  The Saul party are banded together to kill Jesus; in contrast to this the Holy Ghost gives us the account of this woman.  In the house of Simon sat Jesus.  In the high priest's palace they are taking counsel to kill Him; and Mary says, The more they hate Him, the more I love Him.  She has saved her pence; she might have spent them on herself, but no, she will spend them on 
Him.  
She gets that box of precious ointment and pours it upon Him.  He is hated in the hall, but He is loved in this house.  She is a true Jonathan.  The disciples called it “waste”, but the Lord valued it.  Do we find our delight in Him?  “I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to  my  taste”.
  
How much do you know of this?  How much have you delighted in Him to-day?  I do not ask if you have read your Bible, if you have said your prayers, but have you been in His company to-day?  How much happier we should be if we spent our spare moments in His company!

  The next thing is, “Jonathan spake good of David”.  This follows, because he delighted in him.  When the heart is full of Christ, how easy it is to speak of Him!  How hard it is to do so when we get away from the Lord! even if we do, how cold and dry the words are!  Jonathan spake well of David.  If we confess the Lord here, He will confess us there.  A young girl, living near the seaside, was converted, and after a while had to leave home and take a situation.  She went to London as scullery-maid in the family of a nobleman.  It was a humble place she had to fill, but she loved the Lord and desired to please Him.  The nobleman went away with his family for a time on the Continent, leaving orders with his servants as to what he wished done in his absence.  When he returned, he was so pleased with the way they had carried out his wishes, that he said he would give them each a ticket for the opera.  They were called up one by one to receive the tickets, and at last it came to little Mary's turn.  But when offered her ticket, she quietly said,  
‘No, thank you, sir; I do not wish to go’.  
‘Not wish to go, Mary!  What do you mean?
’ he exclaimed.  She answered, 
‘I do not wish to go, sir, because the One I love will not be there’.  The nobleman at first misunderstood her, but she explained: 
‘I mean, sir, the Lord Jesus Christ, who loved me, and gave Himself for me, will not be there, and I do not wish to be there either’.  In that great day that is coming little Mary will be singled out and confessed by the Lord Jesus as one who confessed Him before men.  Why was she able thus to confess Him?  Because she delighted much in Him.

  I come now to another point - chapter 20: 4: “Whatsoever thy soul desireth, I will even do it for thee”.  
That is obedience.  If you take that as a motto, you will have to be much in His company to learn what His soul desires.  “He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me”.  Love is proved by obedience.  And love is proved by having His commandments.  I know very well that many of you young Christians rejoice in that word “Whosoever”.  “Whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins”.
  
You know the grace and comfort of that verse.  Now put the two together, “
whosoever” and “whatsoever”. Thank God for the whosoever!  If you rejoice in the  grace of the “whosoever”,  will you not take up the responsibility of the “whatsoever”.  It would make you read your Bibles more.  Mary sat at the feet of Jesus and heard His word.  Martha was busy serving.  There is plenty of that now.  People are made Marthas directly they are converted.  If I have a friend who is devoted to me, how can he please me if he does not know my mind, and how can we please the Lord if we do not know His mind?  Martha chides the Lord, but He says, “One thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part”.
  
What is the good part?  To sit at His feet and hear His word.  It is a great thing to know how and when to serve the Lord.  It is a great thing for you to be able to say, “Whatsoever thy soul desireth, I will even do it for thee”.

  We will pass on to chapter 20: 32, 33.  I want to
 say a word about the javelin.  What is it?  The javelin is the cross.  You will remember that Saul threw the javelin at David (chapter 18: 11), and it went into the wall, for David avoided it.  With the Lord Jesus, they threw the javelin at Him, and He did not avoid it.  The javelin is the cross; and it means for you, that if you are going to 
obey, you must be prepared to suffer.  You will have to suffer, but it will be for Christ’s sake.  When the Lord was here He talked to His disciples of that javelin, but they understood not, and feared to ask Him.  When He went up into glory He sent the Holy Ghost down, and then they had power to suffer for Him here.  It is a Saviour in glory that gives power to suffer here.  When the sons of Zebedee came and said, “Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy 
right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory”, He answers, “Ye know not what ye ask.  Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of? and to be bapti
sed with the baptism that I am baptised with?” The baptism is what you get outside, the cup is what you taste inside.  This shall be your privilege, to suffer with Him 
now, and by-and-by you shall reign with Him.  If we suffer, we shall reign.

  We come now to the turning-point in this history, the point where Jonathan becomes a warning, chapter 23: 16-19.  He says, “Thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee”.
  
“And David abode in the wood, and Jonathan went to his house”.  
That is where he fell; he put his own interests first, and when David was hunted like a partridge on the mountains, he was not with him.  The men of faith came out and linked themselves with him, recognising him as the future king! but Jonathan was not among them, though he knew this well and proposed a good place for himself: “I shall be next unto thee”.
  
What do we read next of him?  That he has fallen on Mount Gilboa, and his body is nailed 
to the walls of Bethshan.  “O Jonathan, thou wast slain in thine high places.  I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant hast thou been unto me: thy love to
 me was wonderful, passing the love of women”.
  I am not speaking now of getting to heaven, but of the wreck and ruin of discipleship.  Our place in the kingdom will be according to
 our faithfulness to Christ here.  Who will be next to Jesus there?  The one who has been next to Him here in suffering and loss.  I ask you solemnly to consider this.  Are you in some high place?  Are you in some association where you cannot have the company of Christ?  “Jonathan went to his house”.
  
“Thou wast slain in thine high places”.  
Many a man has been ruined there; his own house has come first.  
Not so David;  he says, “I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, ... I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for the Lord”.
  
Jonathan went to his own house instead of going with David to the hold, and thus he fell.  There is the circle of Christ's interests, and if we give that a secondary place, and our own circle, our own house, our family, the first place, we shall fall there.  Not that I should neglect my family.  We have to move in the circle God has placed us in, but we have to serve Christ in it.  The interests of Christ should be dearer to me than my own interests.  Do I make my family circle the first thing?  Then I shall fall there.

  In 2 Chronicles 12 you get God's side of things, and there you find those poor people who went to David to the cave of Adullam, who had nothing in this world, distressed, in debt, and discontented, but recognising in that hunted man the future king.  Of them God says, Your names shall be on the glory roll.  You read down that roll until you come to Jonathan, but it is not the Jonathan of whom I have been speaking.  He who said to David, “I shall be next unto thee”, is out of it; he was slain in his high places.  Again I ask you, earnestly and solemnly, Are you in any high place?  If so, I pray you to
 come down, that you may not fall as Jonathan did.
  Let this man be an example to you in his devotedness on the one hand, and on the other a warning to you in his fall.  “How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!”  The moment your eye is off Christ no amount of intelligence will preserve you.  God grant that you may be exercised about this. 

_____________________
  
  
  
SEEING, AND SEEING CLEARLY
Mark 8: 22-38
  It would be very helpful to us if we had the fact distinctly before our souls that there is only one Man for God.  Perhaps what I am going to say will be difficult to some, but the Spirit of God can make it clear.

  We get the expressions “first man” and “second man” in 1 Corinthians 15: “The first man is of the earth, earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven”.  If you are a Christian, ponder what I say, and ask the Lord to make it clear to you.

  The death of our Lord Jesus Christ has for ever severed our link with the old man.  “Our old man has been crucified with him”.
  
You may not be in the apprehension of it, but that is how God looks at it.  We begin a new history in connection with the second Man.

  There is another thing, and that is that the state of the first man is developed in the Gospels.  I do not want to look round to see what the first man is.  All that he is has come out by the presence of the second Man.  The second Man brought out the character of the first.  We begin as children with the Gospels, and as full-grown men we end with them.  In the Gospels you get man's 
state.  
He has been brought out in his true character, and a very sorry character it is.  Thank God, the link with him has been severed.

  In the previous part of the chapter before us you will find the Lord is warning His disciples as to two leavens.  There are three leavens altogether in scripture which bring out what man is - the leaven of the Pharisees, the leaven of the Sadducees, and the leaven of Herod.  In Matthew the Lord is warning His disciples of the first two, but here it is the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of the Herodians that come before us.  The leaven of the Pharisees is man’s pretension to be righteous; it is connected with religiousness.  The leaven of the Sadducees is connected with man's reasoning powers.  To put it in modern language - the first is ritualism, the second is rationalism, while the leaven of Herod is political.  You see what man is.  One is connected with a spurious righteousness, another with reason, and the third with government and politics.  The leaven of the Herodians is: We are here to do the best we can to make the world better, to leave it better than we found it.

  I now come to what is more before me.  I have read to you the narrative of the blind man, and a most instructive narrative it is.  This blind man sets before us two conditions in which a believer may be found.  He is brought to the Lord, and is severed from his home.  The Lord took him by the hand and led him out of the town.  When a man is converted, everything in this world is lost sight of.  It is no question of things here.  You have the sense of the true value of things.  The Lord closes this chapter with, “What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?”  It is a question of the value of the soul.  When you face this matter you are outside your own affairs; you are facing eternity; you are facing the future with God; your wife, children, farm, everything is lost sight of.  This man is brought out of the town by Christ.  He has contact with Christ.  Have you ever had personal contact with Him?  When He had spit on his eyes and put His hands upon him, He asked him if he saw aught: and he said, “I see men as trees, walking”.
  
That is the first thing.  He does not see clearly; but he sees.  It is a great thing to have your eyes opened.  This blind man represents the state of the disciples who companied with the Lord before His death, and before the Spirit was given.  They were blessed men.  They said, “To whom shall we go?  Thou hast the words of eternal life”.  Yet before redemption was accomplished they did not see clearly.  The language of a man who does not see clearly is, “Be it far from thee, Lord”.
  
Peter had confessed Jesus as the Christ just before.  He had come as a Jew and owned that Jesus was the Personage of whom the Old Testament had spoken.  That was a great thing, but the Lord charges them not to tell any man.  They had been looking for the Lord to set up the kingdom and reign.  They had a right to do so, for it was set forth in the scriptures.  But the Lord says, I am going to 
suffer.  
He speaks to them plainly about it,  He was going to suffer, to die, and to be raised again the third day.  They do not understand it, and therefore Peter rebukes Him; he could not bear it.  Why?  Because the flesh in him was cut to the quick he shrank from suffering.  And the Lord turned and looked upon His disciples.  He saw what the effect of such a remark would be on those He loved.  He looked upon them as much as to say to Peter, Do you not know that your words will be highly injurious to others?  “Get thee behind me, Satan”.
  
Peter did not see things clearly, and when we do not see things clearly we affect others, and that is a very serious thing.  If I allow the flesh in myself, it will come out in my family; and the meeting, too, will be affected by it, and it will be a serious 
matter.
  So the Lord says: “Get thee behind me, Satan”.  
Paul says, in the Epistle to the Galatians, speaking of those who had gone to them with the leaven of the Pharisees, that he could wish them accursed.  
His heart was filled with indignation against those Judaising teachers.  People say we must love each other.  We must stand for the truth.  We must come to scripture to understand what love is.  It was true love working in the heart of the apostle when he said, “If any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be 
accursed”.  
So in his Master here.  How does He put it?  “Get thee behind me, Satan; for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men”.

  Would that we had a deepened sense of this!  There is a great breach between man and God.  How often we savour of the things that be of men! Peter was thinking of the kingdom glory: his Master was thinking of suffering.

  Satan is seeking to dishonour Christ through His people.  It was Satan handling the flesh in Peter, who was in the condition of the blind man who had been touched by Christ, but, as yet, did not see clearly.
  
What the blind man says is, “I see men as trees, walking”; man had an undue place; he saw men.  
I admit that virtue had gone out of Christ, which was for him everlasting blessing.  When Christ touches you, all the blessing is yours, but it is the object of the Spirit of God to lead you into it.

  The blind man with his eyes open, but only seeing men as trees walking, presents a picture of every carnal Christian.  1 Corinthians 2 and 3 will show it.  The apostle, speaking there to the Corinthian saints, who were so highly gifted and yet in such a low state, says, “Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are 
perfect”, etc.  That is, the Corinthians were in such a carnal state through allowing the flesh, that, although they had the Spirit, Paul was obliged to say to them, I cannot unfold the hidden wisdom of God to you; you are carnal, and walk as men; you pride yourselves in your knowledge, and that hinders you; there is wisdom and blessing I cannot put before you, because you cannot see clearly.

  So it was with Peter in Galatians 2.  He went to Antioch, and at first ate with those who believed among the Gentiles, but when some had come down from Jerusalem, he was afraid and drew back.  He was living before the eyes of his fellow-men; he was not free of men.  Is it not often 
so with us?  Would you not like to be thought a devoted Christian or a devoted servant of the Lord?  How much we live before the eyes of others!  May God deliver us from it.

  I come now to the next touch, “After that he put his hands again upon his eyes, and made him look up: and he was restored, and saw every man clearly”.  
It sets forth the Christian that has apprehended the purpose of God; he sees that he belongs to heaven.
  As a natural man, I do not want to go to heaven; all my links are here.  
I am suited to this earth, and on this earth I should like to stay.  But, as a Christian, I am going to heaven because l belong there.
  
I am a man of a new order.  
“As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly”.  
The first man is of the earth, earthy; the second Man is out of heaven.  So the man who sees the purpose of God apprehends that he belongs to heaven.

  You see it exemplified in Stephen; who when full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven and saw all things clearly; he saw the glory of God and Jesus.  When they were battering his face with stones, he did not refuse the suffering; he saw all things clearly; he saw the glory of God and Jesus; he knew his link with heaven, and on earth was like his Master; he had his eye upon Christ, and was like Him in consequence.  “He kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their  charge” - like his Master, who said, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do”.
  
Whence did Stephen get this power?  From Christ in glory.  He says, I belong to heaven; the place that claimed Jesus claims me.

  Christianity gives us an object.  There are two proposals in it.  God says, I will make you happy with Me at home in My presence, and it is through the redemption work of Christ He does so; then He gives me an object to sustain me all the way here.  You look up there to that Object, who satisfies God’s heart.  He 
has given us the same object that we may be satisfied too.  The reason we are not satisfied is because we do not see things clearly.

  I will read a passage that brings it before you - Philippians 3.  Let me say the Apostle Paul pre-eminently sets before us the blind man when he had the second touch and saw all things clearly; he represents what Christianity really is.  The man who brought out the doctrine of 
Christianity is the man who lived it; it is Paul, who saw all things clearly, who writes this Epistle to the Philippians.  “Let us therefore, as many as be 
perfect” - that is, those who see all things clearly - “be thus  minded: and if in anything ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you”.
  
That is great encouragement.
  He knew why he was apprehended.  Christ Jesus had apprehended him for a distinct purpose - to have him like Himself in glory for ever.  It is not the thought of the Saviour having compassion on you and washing you from your sins in His blood - all quite true - and that you might go to heaven when you die - that is the general idea - but that Christ has apprehended you to be 
like Him and with Him for ever.  
The apostle was a man of one idea.  I turn not, he says, to the right hand, or to the left; I press forward toward the mark for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus.

  There seems to be a contradiction between verses 12 and 15.  Verse 15 is the language of a man who sees all things clearly; verse 12 shows that he has not yet attained to perfection, but he has apprehended it in his soul; it is his object.  What 
is your object?  Is it money-making, or earthly comforts?  What governs you day by day?  It is like Levi - that man sitting at the receipt of custom; he is sitting at the money-table, hearing the clink of money from morning till night, because he knows nothing better.  But by-and-by the Son of God draws near to him.  He says to Levi, “Follow me”.
  
Now mark what it says of him in Luke's gospel: “He left all, rose up, and followed him”; he left all first.
  Now the apostle says: “Let … as many as be perfect be thus minded”.  
I will give you an illustration to bring it out.  It is said that an Italian artist one day took his pupils into his picture-gallery, bidding them each select a picture to copy.  One of the pupils, after wandering up and down, seated himself before a perfect masterpiece, saying with a sigh, 
‘If I copy any, it shall be this one’.  
Presently the artist came to see how his pupils were getting on.  When he came to this one he ejaculated, 
‘Oh, is not that splendid!  Look at that, not at my daub!
’  
The master replied, ‘You are the man for me; you have an eye for perfection’. The eye for perfection is verse 15, “As many as be perfect”.  
The man with an eye for perfection sees all things clearly; he sees that Christ and Christ alone will do for God, and he sees that God has called him to be like that Man and with Him for ever.  Verse 12  is my 
‘daub’ - “not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect”.  
Not perfect as to attainment, but perfect as to object.  The Lord by His Spirit draw us from the man that is 
here, and fix our hearts on the Man that is there.
  I trust the Lord will use these remarks to quicken your footsteps after Christ, till travelling days are done, for His name's sake.
_____________________

THE MORAL FEATURES OF CHRISTIAN FELLOWSHIP
Luke 7: 44-50; 8: 1-3; 1 Corinthians 1: 9
  My thought is to take up the important subject of Christian Fellowship, although in so doing I do not intend to present the whole of it in such a short address as this, for it is indeed a very large subject, but it is on my mind to present a few practical thoughts in connection with it, which I trust will be of value to souls.
  My object is not so much to explain Scripture, or to expound certain truths with which we are more or less familiar, but my point is to try and show the moral side of it. I often say, and would again repeat it, our real danger is holding truth in the abstract while our hearts and consciences remain unaffected thereby; because if God gives us light, it is that there might be produced in us a moral answer which will be for His pleasure, otherwise it is practically worthless.
  We sometimes do not distinguish enough between the joy of title and the joy of possession.  There 
must be the joy of title - do not misunderstand me - but the joy of possession must come through exercise.
  I now come to this very important subject, Christian Fellowship.  In Corinthians you will observe we have set before us very clearly what constitutes Christian fellowship.  The verse which is quoted above is the key to the epistle.  The faithful God had called them into “the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ our Lord”.  Now there was at Corinth that which was unworthy of this fellowship, although they had been called into it.  Therefore the apostle is writing in a corrective manner, as also in a spirit of jealousy.  There are two corrective epistles in which the spirit of jealousy is found, the epistles of Corinthians and Galatians.

  Let me here make another remark. The bond of fellowship is the Lord; the boundary is the death of Christ; the power is in the Spirit. What lies at the root of the whole matter and what properly leads to fellowship is appreciation of Christ.
  The appreciation of Christ is the first start, it is what makes the fellowship. If we come together into Christian fellowship it is because we have been taught to appreciate Christ. Indeed, the beauty of Christianity does not lie in individuality, but in the word mutuality.  I do not here speak of things as they exist before our eyes at the present time, for if we are to get God's thoughts about it we must keep clear of all the confusion which we see around us in Christendom.  Here in Scripture we have God's account of Christian fellowship - what is according to His thoughts.  Keep that in mind.  We must get away from the thoughts of men - the principle of expediency - and turn to Scripture to see God's thoughts in regard to this momentous question.

  The appreciation of Christ lies at the root of the whole matter and for that purpose I read that passage in Luke 7. The chapter is a remarkable one.  In it we have three incidents.  The first is the healing of the centurion's servant.  The Jews come to the Lord beseeching Him that He would heal his servant, saying, “He 
was worthy for whom he should do this. For he loveth our nation and he hath built us a synagogue”.  But the centurion sends his friends to say to the Lord, “I am not worthy”.  How far removed, morally, was the centurion from those who were under Jewish prejudices.  “
Say in a word, and my servant shall be healed”.  I am not worthy, but I own you to be Lord.  It is the faith of a gentile confessing Jesus to be Lord.

  The next incident is the raising of the widow's son at Nain.  The Lord comes to the city and at the gate He meets a dead man carried out.  Death had cast its dark shadow over the city of pleasantness.  He speaks the word, the dead man rises.  He is declared to be the Son of God by resurrection of the dead.  Then comes the third incident, the passage which I read in which Jesus is presented as the Christ, the One in whom the grace of God is set forth.  God's disposition to man is set forth in that blessed anointed Man who is in the Pharisee's house.  Thus, in the chapter we have Jesus presented to us as Lord, as Son of God, and as Christ.  He is the anointed vessel of the grace of God towards man.  God's attitude towards all is set forth in Christ.  “And when they had nothing to pay
, he frankly forgave them both”.  He was gracious to them both.  But I want to show you the difference between Simon and the woman who was wisdom's child.  There was a great difference subjectively.  The question naturally arises, what induced Simon to invite the Lord into his house?  On what principle did he ask Him?  We want to get at that.  To my mind this has been somewhat overlooked, because he represents in principle thousands around us at the present time.  In Scripture, especially in the Gospels, persons represent certain principles.  Take this chapter for 
example, where we find indifferentism dearly set forth.  “We have piped unto you
, and ye have not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not wept”.  That principle is much abroad in the world to-day.  But Simon represents a far more subtle principle, that is patronage.  He sought to be a patron in the invitation to eat with him.  He had no kindly feelings towards the Lord, but was in that wretched environment of self-complacency which ever keeps God at a distance.  The Lord felt it, for He had all the true sensibilities of a man in marking the neglect.  Simon would be a patron, but wisdom's child was there.  She comes on another line entirely, and that is the way in which we come.  We all love Christ who are Christians, but we have come along the line this woman came.  We have been taught to appreciate Christ on the line of self-judgment - 
I am nothing.  “To this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word”.  

  We can only learn the blessedness of what God is on the line of self-judgment, and we have to be kept on that line.  She does not utter a word, but the attitude of her soul proclaims her to be wisdom's child.  Simon is there in all his pride of heart and disappointed in his guest.  What an awful gulf between the woman and Simon.  What is of value to God is a heart that appreciates Christ.  He does not value anything else.  If people appreciated the truth they would appreciate Christ, because Christ is the truth.  The One I love is the One in whom the truth is.  Everything else is vapid and worthless.

  The Lord draws the contrast between Simon and the woman.  “Seest thou this woman?  I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath washed my feet with tears and wiped them with the hairs of her head.  Thou gavest me no kiss: but this woman since the time I came in hath not ceased to kiss my feet.  My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment”.  “
For she loved much”.  He has done with Simon and turns to the woman whose heart was attached to Him, and says to her, “Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace”.  Where was she to go?  She must go somewhere.  The atmosphere of Simon's house was not congenial to the Lord, He could not be at home where He was treated with neglect and even contempt.  My heart is grieved when I hear people pleading for charity at the expense of Christ's glory, and I refuse this principle.  No, He is not to be put out in the cold, for He is the bond of Christian fellowship.  Apostasy has set in.  Men stand up in so-called Christian pulpits and insult Christ.  If your 
mother were insulted, what would you do? - why, rise and walk out; but when Christ is insulted, few care.  That is not fellowship.  God appreciates a heart that loves Christ and is true to Him.

  “Go in peace” - where?  The three verses in the next chapter show us the Christian company.  It is pictured in chapter 8.  You may depend upon it, the Spirit has put in juxtaposition these three verses with the previous chapter – Simon’s house and the place where the woman was to go and live.  These are moral thoughts.  In Luke’s Gospel we have moral order.  The woman was to go to this company.  You cannot have Christian fellowship without the twelve apostles. Christian fellowship is based on apostolic teaching: “They continued in the apostle's doctrine and fellowship”.

  In Scripture, the men always represent the doctrine or position, and the women the condition.  You have the women here, but with the twelve, so you cannot have fellowship apart from apostolic teaching.  The prayer of the Lord in John 17: 11, “that they may be one, as we are”, was answered, and apostolic unity was maintained.  We have the apostles’ teaching in Holy Scriptures and there could not be Christian fellowship apart from the apostles.

  The women represent to us the beautiful subjective side, whose hearts had been taught to appreciate Christ.  Here were women drawn together out of the world as it appears from different stations in life, yet held together by one common bond, the Lord who had so graciously delivered them being their object.  
They “ministered unto Him”.  Do you not see in that a contrast to Simon’s house?  The Spirit intends it to be a contrast.  In the one the Lord is neglected, in the other He is appreciated.  Their hearts are knit together by one common object.  “They ministered unto Him”.  So is it in Christian fellowship.  Our hearts have been taught by the Spirit to appreciate that blessed One in whom all the grace of our God is set forth.  We each gladly confess Him to be our Lord, and He has become our bond; but for this we should probably have never known each other.  Let us ever keep this in mind.  It is interesting to note in this connection what is said of the assembly at Antioch in Acts 13.  It seems to be the mind of the Spirit to show a contrast to the assembly at Jerusalem.  In the latter, decline had evidently set in: “there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews
, because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration”.  It seems to indicate spiritual decline; they were 
more or less self-occupied.  While in contrast to this, it is said of the assembly at Antioch: “as they ministered to the Lord
, and fasted, the Holy Spirit said”.  It was from such an assembly the glad tidings went forth with fresh energy and power by Barnabas and Saul.  Service here is seen in connection with the assembly from which they were sent by the Holy Ghost in full fellowship, and it is interesting to notice they returned to the place from which they had been committed to the grace of God for the work they had fulfilled (chapter 14: 27).
  
The happy spiritual condition at Antioch is set forth in the words: “they ministered unto the Lord and fasted” - two great moral features of Christian fellowship.
  I was remarking before in connection with the passage in Corinthians, that the bond of fellowship was the Lord and the boundary the death of Christ.  
Now if you are under the influence of the love of Christ, if you are responsive to it, you will be true to that in which His love is expressed.  I am very much afraid of mere human sentiment or the working of natural feeling in God's things.  It is blessed to be enabled to sing of Christ and his love, but if you are really under this influence you will be true to His death.  It is a great moral reality.

  You remember the passage where the Lord had been speaking of His death and the disciples could not understand that saying, and were afraid to ask Him (Mark 9: 31, 32).  How different it should be with us who have by the Spirit the knowledge of 
where He is, and the love which brought Him to where He was, even to death.  
We should not be afraid to ask Him.  
At Corinth they were not true to the boundary, therefore the apostle writes to them in the spirit of jealousy: “Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?”  
At the close of the epistle, in the midst of warm Christian salutations, there comes one of the most solemn passages in scripture: “If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha” - let him be accursed at the coming of the Lord.  It is the spirit of jealousy.

  It seems to me the Spirit not only saw the possibility of some at Corinth not loving the Lord, but looking along the vista of time when vast numbers would come into the fellowship - the Simons who would be found nominally there - utters these solemn words.  Let us not shrink from them.  Through grace we can say with Peter: “Lord, thou knowest all things, thou knowest that I love thee”.  The Lord by the Spirit has 
written Himself on “the fleshy tables of our hearts”.  
The writer knows what He has written.
  Will you now turn with me to Numbers 5: 5-18, as I desire to show you from this passage how it answers to what the apostle is doing in the epistle to Corinthians:
  “Then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest, and he shall bring her offering for her, the tenth part of a ephah of barley meal; he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense thereon; for it is an offering of jealousy, an offering of memorial, bringing iniquity to remembrance.  And the priest shall bring her near and set her before the Lord; and the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel; and of the dust that is in the floor of the tabernacle, the priest shall take, and put it into the water.  And the priest shall set the woman before the Lord, and uncover the woman's head, and put the offering of memorial in her hands, which is the jealousy offering: and the priest shall have in his hand the bitter water that causeth the curse”.  

  Here we find the law of jealousy; the question is raised as to the fidelity of the wife. The priest places her before the Lord, puts the dust of the tabernacle in the holy water in an earthen vessel.  “Thou hast brought me into the dust of death”.  It was here the love of the husband was fully proved, and she is to be tested by that in which His love was expressed; if she be faithful, the bitter water which causes the curse becomes the means of fruitfulness.  She is made to drink of death.
  
In like manner the apostle by the Spirit brings the Corinthians before the Lord.  He presents to them the testimony of the death of Christ, as meeting the allowance of that which was unworthy of the fellowship into which they had been called.
  
Of the Cross, as setting aside the wisdom of man, in chapters 1 and 2.  In chapter 5 the demand in righteousness to purge out the old leaven, for “Christ our passover 
is sacrificed for us”.  Then in chapter 10, the separation from a false fellowship: “The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ”. 

  To this testimony there was an answer in measure, as we see in the second epistle.  There was fidelity to Christ and the testimony of His death was responded to, thus proving that Christ was “written on the fleshy tables of their hearts”.

  I now desire to draw your attention to Numbers 6: 22-27.  
“And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying, on this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying unto them: The Lord bless thee, and keep thee.  The Lord make his face shine upon thee
, and be gracious unto thee.  
The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.  And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel; and I will bless them”.

  I suppose no sweeter words than these are to be found in the Old Testament: God's proposal for Israel, His benediction; and in a future day it will be their portion, as the Psalms and Prophets plainly foretell.  Note the spiritual order here - the benediction is appended to the law of the Nazarite.  Surely a lesson for us; we must accept the separation to be in the benediction - a most important principle for this present moment.  As in Luke 24: 50, “He led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted u
p his hands, and blessed them”.  He separated them to bless them.  So the apostle in Galatians 6: 14: “But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me
, and I unto the world”.  The apostle has before him not the world of pleasure, as we should speak; the world he speaks of here is evidently the religious world - the place man after the flesh has religiously.  This is plainly seen in the former part of the epistle. Satan's ministers “transforming themselves 
… as ministers of righteousness”, had been busy seeking to get them circumcised and to keep the law, thus to glory in their flesh.
  But the apostle accepts the separation of the Cross from such a world.  Once he had been a great man in it, but now this double crucifixion had entirely separated him from it and he sets before us a new condition and rule: “For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature”.  Now the apostle by the Spirit gives the benediction: “And as many as walk according to this rule, Peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God”.  We must accept the separation and walk according to this rule to be in the benediction.  It is on this line the apostle presents the death of Christ, in 1 Corinthians 10, as the true boundary line: “the cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?”  All the blessing was inside this boundary in the power of the Spirit. To go outside was to provoke the Lord to jealousy.  “Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy
? are we stronger than he?”
  I now come to my last point and would read Numbers 8: 1-4:  “And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him, when thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over against the candlestick.  And Aaron did so; he lighted the lamps thereof over against the candlestick, as the Lord commanded Moses.  And this work of the candlestick was of beaten gold
 … unto the flowers thereof, was beaten work: according unto the pattern which the Lord had shewed Moses, so he made the candlestick”.
  This is a remarkable passage as coming here, and could not possibly be understood did we not see the spiritual design and teaching.  It is found between the previous chapter which gives us a long account of the dedication of the substance of the prince in Israel to the service of God, and the next chapter which gives us the account of the dedication of the Levites to the service of God.  The instruction about the candlestick comes between as teaching us a great lesson: the light is to be 
“over against the candlestick”.  The thought is that the light is to show the beauty of the candlestick.  

  “Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven”.  As also in 1 Peter 
4: 10, 11.  Verse 10 would answer to Numbers 7 - the dedication of substance, and verse 11 more to Numbers 8 - the dedication of the Levites, but it was in order “that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever”.

  Now turn to 2 Thessalonians 1: 10.  “When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed) in that day”.  Here the apostle is setting before us “that day” when there will be a perfect answer to the testimony.  “He shall be glorified in his saints”.  The light should be over against the candlestick in that day.  How the beloved apostle, who was surely marked by divine compassions towards men in his gospel testimony, ever kept in view the glory of the One who was the subject of that testimony.  Thus he could pray in view of the future that it might be morally true of them now.  “Wherefore also we pray always for you that our Go
d would count you worthy of this calling, and fulfil all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power, that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ”.
  It is his desire that the light be over against the candlestick now.  The climax of Christian fellowship is the glory of the Lord.

  The grace of the Lord is the bond, the death of Christ is the boundary, and the object in the power of the Spirit is the glory of the Lord.  The subject is a large one for the compass of our address, but I have endeavoured to show you some moral features of Christian fellowship, which I trust may lead to exercise and thus to profit.

_____________________
  From an un-dated leaflet
  
TWO ADDRESSES ON PSALMS 90, 91 AND 92
THE TITLE TO LIVE FORFEITED
From an un-dated leaflet
Psalm 90: 1, 2; 91: 14-16; 92: 12-16
  In the millennium everybody will be subject to the rule of Christ, and they will know God.  
The glory of God will fill the world as the waters cover the sea, but the way of happiness then and the way of happiness now is just the same.  One might have said to Job, See what God has done.  He has given you twice as much as before; but I think I can hear Job saying, That does not constitute my blessing - I have learned to know God - that is the substance of blessing.  It is not change of circumstances which constitute our blessing - 
we want to be changed - it is an inward thing.  If you come under the rule of Christ and into the knowledge of what God is, it will make you profoundly happy.
  
Psalm 90 is the prayer of Moses, the man of God, and stands at the head of the fourth book of Psalms.  A very valuable introduction it is, too, and full of moral principles which I shall endeavour to apply to ourselves.  Moses, the man of God, voices the cry of the man who has forfeited his title to live, but before doing so it is most blessed to see that he states in the first two verses what God is.  In this lies our refuge.  “From everlasting to everlasting, thou art God”.  Then in verse 3 he begins to tell us about ourselves - he states what man is now.  His days are shortened.  No matter what I attain to in the way of position or understanding, I must die, and we must face it.  Moses voices the cry, and he gives us the reason why man’s days are shortened.  

  It is a very interesting fact that it was God's intention in scripture that a man should live 1000 years.  God is God, and He is going to have His way after all.  Meanwhile the thought has been frustrated and man’s days are shortened.
  
In Genesis 11 you find that in the days of Peleg the age of man went down from 500 to 250 years at once.  Men divided the land at that time, and, it seems to me, God had to shorten their days because they grew so selfish.  I think it is a great mercy that man’s days are shortened, because of what he is.  “The days of our years”, says Moses, “are threescore years and ten; and if by reason of strength they be fourscore
 years, yet is their strength labour and sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we fly away”. (Ps 110: 10.)  I have no doubt it was written in connection with 
the shortening of their days in the wilderness.  If Moses voices the cry of the man who has forfeited his title to live, yet at the close of the psalm there is hope, and the hope is found in what God is.  This is the ground of hope in verses 11 to 17, founded on verses 1, 2.  He states what God is.  It all has reference of course, to Israel, but there are great principles to which I desire to call your attention:-

    I.  The fear of God.  

   II.  The mercy of God.  

  III.  The work of God.  

  IV.  The glory of God.  

   V.  The beauty of God.

  These are the five things set forth in this psalm.  

  Read verse 12: “So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom”.  I think that is the first great principle.  You number your days - you recognise the fact that as a man you have forfeited your title to live, and that should lead you to apply your heart to wisdom, and the first thing in the way of wisdom is the fear of the Lord.  “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom”.  If we start feebly on that point we shall be weak all along the line.  The first great work of God in a man’s soul is that he begins to fear God.  I think men are getting very much weaker now as to the public acknowledgment of God; people do not fear God as they used to - they are drifting.  There is a great lack of the fear of God, and where that is so individually, you may depend upon it there is a very poor foundation in a man’s soul.  

  The beginning of wisdom is to fear God.  That is, 
you have no sense in your soul of what is due to God.  Take the work of God in the thief on the cross.  He had to number his moments.  But what happened to him?  The Spirit of God was producing a work in his soul.  There was a divine Person by his side doing a work for him, and there was another divine Person doing a work in him.  
The first mark of a divine work in his soul was that he said to his fellow, “Dost thou not fear God?” &c.  It is a great thing to fear God.  That is, that you have in your soul a proper sense of what is due to God.  I think that is the great mark here, and they begin by saying, “So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom”. (v 12) 

  The next thing is the “Mercy of God”. Read verse 14: “O satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice and be glad all our days”.  The fear of God always leads you to a sense of your need of His mercy.  If there is the fear of God you must in the very nature of things appeal for mercy, because you are made to feel how unsuitable you are to God, and that you are a subject for the sovereign mercy of God.  We are here to-night the fruit of the sovereign mercy of God.  I think that is a very safe thing because it gives you ballast.  Sovereign mercy is good ballast for your ship.  I well remember, years ago, listening to an aged servant of Christ.  He said, 
‘Keep your ship well ballasted with humility’, and a sense of the sovereign mercy of God produces this.  There is such a thing as growth, but it is well for us to have a deepening sense in our souls that we are the subjects of sovereign mercy.  

  The apostle says in Timothy, “I obtained mercy” that I might be a pattern of what God could do in that way.  The sovereign mercy of God reached out to the chief of sinners.  Although he had a full and deep sense of the purpose of God, which was connected with the 
‘top’, he never forgot that he was a subject of the sovereign mercy of God.  Going back to the thief on the cross again, he said, “Lord, remember me” - pitifully consider me.  That is an appeal for mercy.  So it always has been and always will be in the history of a soul, that is, that the fear of God is first known, and then there is an appeal for mercy.  One could say a great deal about it.  There is no doubt that Moses had a very lively sense of it.  God said to him, “I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy”, and then in Numbers 14 Moses pleads with God on the ground of His sovereign mercy, at the very time, I think, when this psalm was written, or composed.  

  In Romans 11, where the apostle by the Spirit sets forth the faithfulness of God to His people Israel on the ground of righteousness, he points out that they all come in on the ground of mercy.  Immediately the note is struck, the apostle bursts out, “O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!” The key to the whole chapter is the mercy of God.  In other words, “From everlasting to everlasting, thou art God”.
  
He is rich in mercy.  
They cry for mercy here, “O satisfy us early with thy mercy”.  

  Let me for a moment again allude to Timothy.  The apostle speaks of the gospel in connection with his need in the first epistle.  “This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief”.  When he is writing the second epistle he presents the gospel from another side (1 Tim 2: 9), that is, in connection with the purpose of God.  On the one hand, I want to see how He has reached me on the side of my need and that He has pitifully considered me according to His sovereign mercy.  On the other hand He would have us see that 
Christ reached us at the bottom, because He wanted us at the top.  “According to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began”.  While 
we want to keep the even balance of this in our souls, and I am sure you will admit the truth of it, I desire to press that the fear of God always leads to an appeal for mercy and He “satisfies them early with his mercy”. 
  Now in verse 16 He says, “Let thy work appear”. What is involved in that is the work of Christ.  There are two things seen in the death of Christ: 1st, 
God’s own absolute and abiding answer to all that I find in myself that is unsuitable to Him; and, 2nd, the setting before my delighted heart the infinite blessedness of what God is.  In the death of Christ, I have lost myself and found God
.  Some one has said that that which was the witness of the judgment of God - death - has become now the everlasting witness of the love of God.  

  Another side is that the Spirit of God has come and dwells in us in order that we may realise, enjoy and enter into the blessedness of it all.  There is the work of Christ for us in death, and the work of the Spirit in us to make good what is set forth in the death of Christ.  

  In verse 16 we see that what is connected with the work of Christ is God's glory.  “Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children”. God glorifies Himself in displaying Himself.  
He does what He does because He is what He is, and in doing what He does, He sets forth what He is.  He glorifies Himself by making Himself known.  

  An eternity of bliss is summed up in two remarkable sentences:-
  God all and God in all.  

  God all to you in revelation, and in all in response - that is, there is an everlasting throb of response, a universe throbbing back to God.  What is one’s happiness now as a Christian?  That God is revealed to you and 
there is a response in you.  You may be conscious how feebly you are in it, but if you are a Christian you love God, the work of Christ has appeared to you, and there is an answer in your heart to what God is.  It will be so in the millennium.  God will see it there, although it may not be in its fulness and completeness.  W
Men will love God and will love their neighbour.  

  Read verse 17.  In the interpretation this psalm has nothing to do with us, but in the application it has.  Now they say, “Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us”.  Is not that a beautiful conclusion?  If His glory shines, there will be a reflection.  Do you think anything will die that has the beauty of the Lord upon it?  I want you to get in your souls a sense of the moral necessity of death; but nothing that bears the beauty of the Lord will die.  He has put that beauty upon us.  I shall not die as a Christian.  Death will not overwhelm me - “
whosevever … believeth in me shall never die”. Death will not interrupt my joy.  It will overwhelm the man who has never feared God and has not felt his need of the mercy of God.  If I had to die to-night at 12 o’clock I should be like another man in this respect, I should leave sorrowing hearts behind, but I should not die out of the love of God.  I am getting younger - the inner man is rejuvenated day by day.  The beauty of the Lord will be upon them and they will live out their days - l000 years - and they will be transferred from the millennial earth to the eternal earth, part of that universe of bliss when God shall be all in all.  

  Now how is it all going to be brought about?  I wish you could see the beauty of scripture.  Look at the next psalm.  Moses wrote Psalm 
90., but I do not know who wrote the next.  It was probably written many years after and yet by the Spirit has been placed directly after this psalm.  It speaks of Christ.  Christ is God's answer to everything.  In verse 2 you are introduced at once to the Lord Jesus Christ -  “I will say” - Jesus speaks - the Messiah - the Son of God in incarnation - His voice is heard.  “I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God; in him will I trust”. (v 2)
  
Do you see that Christ is our rest?  How could you have the hopes expressed in Psalm 90 fulfilled except in Christ.  God says, Look at My Son - in Him is the Yea and Amen - you are immediately introduced to Christ.  

  In Psalms 42, 43 and 44 we get another cry - it is like the falling barometer - they cry an exceeding bitter cry; but God's answer to the cry is Christ, as in the psalm before us.  So Psalm 45 commences, “My heart is inditing a good matter: I speak of the things which I have 
made touching the king”.  Christ is the Yea and Amen.  How my heart rejoices in it.  Everything is secured for God and for us in the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ.  We poor creatures have been nothing but a “nay“ to God, but God has got His “Yea”.  David had to say, “Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure”.  Why?  Because in Him is the Yea and Amen - the blessed Christ of God.  

  It thrills one’s soul to see the marvellous structure of scripture.  Who but a divine author could put things together like this?  Read Psalm 91: 1.  I want now to speak a little about the “secret place”. There is a secret place, a place of shelter for your soul, which has been discovered by the Lord Jesus Christ.  

  In the first two verses of Psalm 91 there are three names which God has been pleased to reveal Himself by in the Old Testament:-  

  Most High, 
  El Shaddai (Almighty God), 
  Jehovah.  

  As the Most High He is possessor of heaven and earth.  (See Gen 14: 18-22).  That name sets forth the absolute supremacy of God.  He will be known as the Most High God in the millennium, when all evil shall be put down.  He is the possessor of heaven and earth - that also goes with the thought of the Most High God.  

  In Genesis 17: 1 He is spoken of as the Almighty God, which indicates that He is absolute in power.  In Exodus 6: 1-3 He assumes another name - Jehovah, and this means that He is the unchangeable One.  

  To us He is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.  You could not get that in the Psalms, because it is not in keeping with the line of things there presented; but He is supreme, absolute in power, and the unchanging One who is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.  He is the Almighty God to us.  How?  He raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.  He is the possessor of heaven and earth, for “the Father loveth the Son
, and hath given all things into his hand”. He is the unchangeable One.  Who?  Our God and Father.  These three names have their full force and 
meaning in the name to us familiar and whereby we know God - the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in Matthew 11.  I will shew you the “secret place”. (v 25)  This is the answer to the psalm.  

  “At that time Jesus answered and said”. Answered what?  He gives an answer to His God and Father in the circumstances in which He was found, namely, John was offended because of Him, and the cities had cast His love in His teeth, “ For my love they 
are my adversaries”.  It was the darkest moment for our Lord, but He is found in the “secret place”. 

  Many times have I said, Lord, give me to know that secret place, that my heart may in some measure answer back in all the circumstances, all the pressure I have to meet with here; that my heart may give the answer that Thy blessed heart gave back in such perfection.  

  “I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth [He is the Most High God], because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.  Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in thy sight”. 
 There is the secret place - the bosom of the Father.  The affection well known to Him, consciously known to me.  You have a secret place; I pray that you may know it.  If you do you will be silenced, for there is not the movement of will in that secret place - absolute rest, your will cannot work there.
  
Oh, what a spot! The Lord is in it here, in absolute submission to God.  “Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in thy sight”.  It is the answer that His heart gave back to the Father from the secret place.  

  Read verse 27-end.  He stands in the secret place and says, “Come unto me!”  He, the blessed Son in the secret place, invites poor, heavy laden ones to come into that secret place to find that they are loved where He is loved.  

  There is nothing more wretched than a Christian being out of the secret place, and judging God by his circumstances.  
‘It was too painful for me’. (See Ps 73)  Why?  He was out of the secret place.

  He bids you come back to the secret place, where you can find rest for your soul.  He dwells in that place.  

  I do pity people who judge God by their circumstances, by what they see with their eyes, but the moment they come back to the sanctuary (Ps 73), or the “secret place”, everything is seen in its true light.  You are 
made to understand that you are not to judge God by your circumstances here.  

  “Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest”. 
  Rest!  Where?  In the secret place.  How?  In the knowledge of the Father's love.  You come to Me, says He, I will be your Teacher, I will reveal the Father to you, I will let you know that He loves you as He loves Me.  That is “rest”. (v 29) Now, He says, keep company with Me, “Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me”, &c.  I pray God that we may know the secret place!  Never mind about having your head filled.  It is one thing to have your mind filled with the word, but it is another thing that you sincerely desire and seek the blessedness of the thing day by day.  

  It is very beautiful to see that we go from a cry to a song.  We have a “song on the Sabbath day”. (Ps 92)  What a sabbath day it is when our hearts rest where Christ is! 

_____________
  
CHRIST THE ONE WHO ESTABLISHED HIS TITLE TO LIVE
Psalm 91
  On previous occasions we have had the three previous psalms before us, the consideration of which has I trust been profitable to us.  

  Psalms 90, 91 and 92 are an introduction to the fourth book.  In each of the four books I may mention you have a great sorrow psalm, and each sorrow psalm is according to the subject of each book.  

  Psalm 22 is the great sorrow psalm of the first book, which ends with Psalm 41, and the great idea of that sorrow psalm is dwelling. - God is going to dwell in the praises of His people, and the Lord Jesus is in His sorrow there in going into death to secure that dwelling-place for God.  The One who secured it is the One who leads the praises.  He is the great “Choirmaster” and He starts the singing, and if you sing at all, you sing with Jesus.  When we come to meet the Lord, He is the “Choir-master”, and the supper puts the choir in order, so that you may sing - not merely with hymn-book - but with a heart full to bursting.  

  The great sorrow psalm of the second book is Psalm 69, and the thought is not dwelling, but reigning - He goes into the depths and He suffers to reign.  Psalm 88 is the great sorrow psalm of the third book, and the sorrow there is that He bears the curse of the old covenant in order to introduce the blessings of the new.  In the fourth book the great sorrow psalm is Psalm 102.  That is greatest of all, in one sense - the cutting off of the Lord Jesus Christ.  

  Now as I have previously pointed out, the fourth book commences with Psalm 90, and there Moses voices the cry of the man who has forfeited his title to live.  That is what you and I have done, and I should like these things to lay hold of our souls.  What lays hold of our souls is like a sheet-anchor.  It is a moral necessity that man should die.  God does not delight in death - He is the God of the living, and if death is here, the hand of God has been forced to it.  

  Death is here because of what man is.  Man has got away from the image of God, but that which bears the image of God can never die.  As a Christian I shall never die, but I have to learn that I am a poor thing and have forfeited my title to live.  One has to come to it.  I will tell you what 
helps one to come to it - the Lord's supper, if we understood it.  I know what it is to have death in my house, and to come to the supper, and the Lord has said to me, 
‘can you wonder that any one should die if I died?’  He died out of this world, and the supper has been instituted that we should remember that.  Every Lord's day morning I am in the presence of the death of One who never forfeited His title to live.  He went into death voluntarily and He has gone into another world - He has died out of this.  

  If Moses cries, it is a cry in hope - he applies his heart to wisdom (the fear of the Lord), calls for mercy, asks that the work of God may appear, and that the glory of God may shine, and lastly, that the beauty of the Lord their God may be upon them, and they have passed beyond the power of death.  They will then be in millennial blessing and will morally answer to the glory in that day, and so the beauty of the Lord will rest upon them.  As Christians we come along the same lines exactly, and we should be in the presence of the glory of the Lord - His beauty therefore resting upon us.  

  Psalm 91 is the history of the Man who established His title to live.  If God is going to bless the man in Psalm 90, it will be through Christ, and we are therefore introduced to Christ in Psalm 91.  If one can establish His title to live there is hope for us.  Then the point comes out that the Man who establishes His title to live in Psalm 91
 meets death in Psalm 102.  I recommend you to read it - it is the cry of the Man who established His title to live in the presence of death.  We are so familiar with the fact that Jesus died, and we have the words so glibly on our lips, that it seems to me that we are in danger of losing the sense of the deep reality of His death.  It was His perfection as a Man to deprecate and to shrink from it - He felt it.  It says in Hebrews, “Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard 
in that he feared”.  Let that scripture come home closely to your souls.  We know very well that he was God over all, blessed for ever, but still there is the perfection and reality of His humanity, and He says, “O my God, 
take me not away in the midst of my days”.  Yet at that very time He is greeted as Jehovah.  “Of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth, &c.,” and with the same divine ease with which you called it into being, you shall fold it up like a garment.  “As a vesture 
shalt thou change them”. (Ps 102: 24-27.)  We have to bow, with unshod feet, in the presence of such grandeur as that.  God has come near to us - to weep and to feel things - 
that we might know Him.  There is a reality about Him which would endear Christ to us if we entered into it, and yet of that One it goes on to say, “But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end”.  He never changes - I am in touch with Him, One who is outside the reach of death.  If you have trusted Him, He has put His own stamp of continuity upon you.  I could not tell you what a pleasure that is to me.  In the might of the Spirit, He has put that imperishable stamp upon us and we shall continue.  I longed for continuity and have got it.  I do not want anything that will not continue.  As a Christian I shall never die.  “He that doeth the will of God abideth for ever”.  I should like our souls to lay hold of the grandeur of Christianity and the mighty power it is to lift us above things here.  Would you not like to give people the impression that you are in touch with a scene outside the reach of death?  

  Psalm 92 is a sabbath day psalm - a song of the sabbath day.  The rest of God is reached -  it is an order of things that suits God because it bears His image; and it is in the very nature of the thing outside the reach of death.  You go from a cry to a song - from “growing up in the morning and withering in the evening” you go to “
the palm tree … in the courts of our God ... fat and flourishing”.  That is where Israel will be by-and-by.  “Those that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of our God”. 

  Now we come to this little psalm (93), which is the thesis of the fourth book.  There are three things:-
  

  1.  The stability of the throne.  

  2.  The surety of His testimonies.  

  3.  Holiness - which becomes His house.  

  If we are Christians the Spirit of God puts us in touch now with all that we get in the fourth book of psalms, which will be publicly manifested by-and-by, when Jehovah shall reign.  Our eyes do not see it, our ears do not take cognisance of it, but it is a reality to us in the power of the Spirit.  

  What I want to shew you is that God has already set up His throne - it is established.  The strict interpretation of the passage before us indicates that it will be publicly so for Israel by-and-by, and there will be great relief and blessing.  This you will understand more clearly if you study Psalm 94.  Read verse 20.  Israel by-and-by will go through all the 
distress set forth in the psalm, because they are in the presence of another throne - the throne of iniquity, Antichrist, what man's throne will eventually culminate in.  

  I should like to say a little more on that.  God has committed power to man  - “the powers that be are ordained of God”.  From Babylon the power went to the Persians, and from thence to the Grecians.  The power then passed on to the Romans.  When Jesus was before Pilate, the power was tested.  God’s thought is that there should be righteousness and judgment, but was righteousness and judgment exercised when Jesus, an innocent man, stood before the bar of Pilate?  No.  The throne that was committed to man miserably failed - righteousness was divorced from judgment, and Jesus was condemned by man.  Still the government goes on, and if you are with God you will be subject to the powers that be.  It is a part of practical Christianity to recognise the powers that be as ordained of God.  The power committed to man will end as in Psalm 94: 20.  All is tending in that direction now.  Well, Israel will be in the presence of that, when judgment and righteousness will be divorced, and they will cry to be delivered.  They will hold on to God.  In integrity of heart, in deep affliction, they will cling to the throne of God, and will not have anything to do with the “throne of iniquity”, and some will be martyred in consequence.  

  What I want to shew is, if you have got the Spirit you have it in order that you may see where the throne of God is, for we have already come under the influence of it now; it is presented in testimony to us, and it is apprehended by us in the living power of the Spirit.  

  Mark what the scripture says: “Thy testimonies are very sure”.  He has given testimony to us of that which the eye cannot see, and which the senses cannot take cognisance of, and we have received the Spirit in order that the reality of it may be known in our souls.  You must pay attention to this, “Thy testimonies are very sure”.  In the power of the Spirit we see that what is written is presented in a living Person.  Thy testimonies are very sure for us, for testimony has received its answer in a living Person, and that Person our Lord Jesus Christ.  

  From three passages of scripture I want to shew you how this works.  Read Luke 4: 16 - 21.  The living word was there turning over the roll in the synagogue at Nazareth.  That He had in His hand was what was written, and He read from Isaiah, “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, 
because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord.  And He closed the book”.  He says, “This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears”.  They turn from what is written to what is presented in His Person.  What is written finds its living expression in a Person.  He is the Spirit of the scripture - He is it - all is set forth livingly in Him - “Thy testimonies are very sure”. 

  Take another case.  The Spirit of God is brooding over the soul of a man (Acts 8: 26-40), and he is reading Isaiah 53.  He does not understand it, but he continues to read - he is on the right track - “Thy testimonies are very sure”.  Philip comes near, “Understandest thou what thou readest?”  Philip began at the same scripture, and preached unto him Jesus.  “Thy testimonies are very sure”.  Now the man has got to the Person; what was written in the scriptures was before his soul in a living Person - he preached to him Jesus.  Philip could leave him now.  Why?  Because he has got the key to scripture - the Person.  

  Again, Paul, when writing to Timothy, says, “From a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith that is in Christ Jesus”.  “Thy testimonies are very sure”. 

  In all three cases there is the written word, but the beauty of it is that these testimonies are verified in a living Person.  It is a great thing to get hold of that.  If the letter of the word does not lead you to the living Person it is of no value.  It is most important “Thy testimonies are very sure”, because His testimonies are set forth in Christ.  I beg you to pray about it.  You must cleave to the sure testimonies of God, but remember, they are all presented livingly in the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ.

  Where is the throne of God, then?  It is in a Person.  The foundation of the throne is established in the death of Christ, and the manifestation of the throne is seen in the Lord Jesus where He is.  “Then you think of the throne it conveys a moral idea.  The throne of England conveys the idea of the law and rule of the land.  The blessed Lord went into death to establish the foundation of the throne, and it is set forth in Psalm 45, “Thou hast loved righteousness
, and hated iniquity”.  His love for righteousness, hatred of iniquity, was seen when He entered into death.  The question of good and evil, and everything, has been brought to bear 
there, and has been settled for God at the cross.  The foundation of all blessing lies there, because all that God is has been made good by Him - His righteousness, majesty, holiness, truth, all that He is as a God of love, too.  The basis of the throne has been established in the death of Christ.

  You think of that death as having relieved you; but if the death of Christ has relieved you of your responsibility, it has established another responsibility as I understand it.  “Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness”. He died for that - that we might come under this blessed rule and live to righteousness.  

  The throne is set forth in the Lord Jesus Christ, where He now is.  In Hebrews 2 you go from “one in a certain place testified” to the surety of the thing in a Person - “but we see Jesus”.  There you have the throne by the Spirit - we see Jesus.  I have come under Him as my Lord.  “We see not yet all things put under him”, but we are under Him.  Oh, blessed subjection, that has for its spring love!  Your heart has been attached to Him, and you confess Him to be your Lord.  A Christian is one into whose life God has come, and he confesses Jesus as Lord.  That is, the habit of your soul is constant and abiding confession to Him that He is your Lord.  There is a living link between your soul and Him, and you are in subjection to Him.  The thought comes out in the Acts of the Apostles.  The Lord said, “Ananias!”  He said, “Here am I, Lord”.  I like that.  He was not startled - he did not say, 
‘Who is this?’  Nay, “Here am I, Lord”.  This is what we want - whilst walking down the street, a confession of Him as your Lord.  I would not stop you in any gospel activity, but confessing Him as your Lord is not pushing a tract into everybody’s hand, but in the secret of your soul, He is your Lord.  Would not He save you from all the dangers and powers of evil in this world?  You come under Him as Lord, and He becomes your Saviour, your confession is made unto salvation.  I would not, of course, confine the word “salvation”. In the confession of Jesus as Lord, we are in present salvation - saved from all the horrid principles around “ the mighty waves of the sea”. (v 4) 

  That is the throne.  Do not lose the sense in your soul that but for the power of that throne you would be swept away and overwhelmed.  We are in touch with a throne which cannot be moved - we have received a kingdom which cannot be moved, and although I am a poor thing, if I am in the confession of Jesus as Lord, He preserves me; all the power of that 
throne is for me - it is established in the Lord Jesus Christ at the right hand of God.  

  There are the dark tidal-waves of rationalism, superstition and spiritualism rolling over this country, and I say, ‘O Lord, I confess Thee to be Lord’, and I am in a safe spot.  He is mightier than the “wave of the sea”.  “His testimonies are very sure”, and His testimony is to confess Jesus as your Lord and you come under Him for salvation.  

  Another thing. It is a throne of grace - “So might grace reign through righteousness”.  The God of grace has come into my life and I have come under the Lord Jesus Christ - that is the kingdom of God.  Do not forget that it is a throne of grace.  Grace that can meet you in an hour of need.  If you come under the blessed influence of the grace of God, you will not be pretentious; there will be a mark of subduedness about you.  What I feel is that these things may be laid hold of by the mind, but I beg you to go to God that you might come under the moral influence of them in your soul.  I will tell you what grace does.  It breaks a man up; it leads also to this, 
‘I cannot have any secrets’.  I am become an upright man, nothing is kept back.  If our souls were more under the influence of grace, we would be more helpful to each other.  Grace makes you hard upon yourself, and very tender with other people.  There would be a great deal of private restoration if we knew what it was to be under the influence of the grace of God.  The throne is a throne of grace, and what is the result of it all?  We are in perfect peace in the midst of all opposite elements.  

  You need to be under the influence of the throne in your practical, everyday life.  It has a great moral bearing on your outside life, your business and your home life.  

  The Lord loves you, and He wants you to know something about these things, and if you look to Him, He will help you.  It is a blessed thing to be in the consciousness that you are in touch with Him and that He is your present Saviour, and I pray you may know it day by day for His name’s sake.  

____________________
  
SALVATION AND RIGHTEOUSNESS
This address and the following one were published together in an 
un-dated booklet
Psalm 3 and 4
  The two psalms I have read are the first two experimental psalms, and I want to bring before you their application to us.  Now the first eight Psalms are a little book of psalms by themselves.  They are a synopsis of the whole book.  God has been pleased to put the psalms together in a wonderful way.  It took a thousand years to write the whole book.  There are many writers but the Spirit of God who inspired them has also edited them.  If people admire the material world, as they do, how much more should we admire scripture! Scripture is infinitely greater than any material creation.  When you come to scripture you are made to feel the finger of God, and that no man has had a hand in it save as an instrument.  There is divine order in it, and no confusion; but you want eyes to see it.

  In reading the Psalms, I get a great sense that God alone is the Author, and man is absolutely excluded.  Various writers wrote the Psalms, and sometime one psalm is written perhaps a hundred years before another; but the Spirit of God has put them together for us in such a way that we might have the deepest instruction.  You may look at them dispensationally and morally.  God can give dispensational and moral teaching at the same time, but, of course, the Psalms refer to Israel in their strict interpretation.  I have said this just in way of preface.

  Now in the first eight psalms you get a synopsis of the whole book.  The first psalm is moral beauty, and then you get Christ officially in the second.  After these you have five experimental psalms. (Ps 3-7)  You get in Psalm 3, which is the first experimental one, the subject of salvation.  Then the next one is righteousness.  Psalm 5 is holiness, Psalm 6 is discipline, Psalm 7 is God's vindication of the righteous, and Psalm 8 is the millennium.  If we were really sitting down to study the book, we could go into these things, but now I am going to give a little exhortation and comfort in the application of these psalms.  The first psalm is the righteous man who is suitable to God.  Verse l is separation, verse 2 is meditation and verse 3 is prosperity.  If you want to be spiritually prosperous, you must be marked by separation and meditation.

  You will never bear the marks of prosperity unless you are separate from what is contrary to God, and formed by what is suitable to Him.  That is what we are taught in the first psalm.  Then it also suggests the blessed fact that there will be a congregation of such people - Israel, of course.  Israel is the centre of the whole thing.  Later on in this book we find how these people are made suitable.  God changes the man before He changes his circumstances.  “I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them”. (Heb 10: 16)  This is what God will do, and I am very glad of it.  There will be a righteous congregation on this earth, and they will sit under their own vine and fig-tree.

  He has a congregation of righteous people in us.  It is a fine thing to get in your soul, that all that is of God abides, and what is not of God will be blown away like chaff.  I think this is a very fine psalm, beloved Christians.  Then in the second you get where Christ is; you get Him set on high by God.  But the moral (Ps 1) precedes the official, which is Psalm 2.

  I remember writing to some one, and saying that I would like to be able to preach like some one else of whom I was speaking.  The answer I got was, “I would rather see you godly than gifted”.  We are prone to look at that which will bring us prominently before our fellows.  The second psalm is the official position, and it is a fine tonic, which I have recommended to young men.  You get the rage and impotence of man on the one hand, and the quiet majesty of God on the other.  I feel the current down here running against me, but there is the quiet majesty of God.

  Believe me, that what is fatal to soul prosperity is that men have too large a place in our hearts.  Man is too attractive to us, and that is why we are often spiritually benumbed. What we want to do is to get under the influence of Christ.  Now in this psalm the heathen are raging, and the people imagining a vain thing.  On the other hand, you get the quiet majesty of God.  It is a blessed thing to get into your soul the sense of the majesty of God, that all here that is opposed to Him will go to pieces.  In Acts 4 they recite this psalm, They were brought up before the council, composed of people of position in this world, but these Christians had a very lively sense, in the power of the Spirit, of their link with Christ, and it is a great thing to see that God is going to have His way.

  In this Psalm Christ is the anointed One; God also salutes Him as His Son.  “Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee”.  There is a key to 
the Gospel of Matthew in that verse.  God salutes Him.  I love to think of the salutation of God in connection with the opposition of man.  The Christ of God is hated in this world.  We must have the Christ of scripture, and not the Christ of people's imaginations.

  Let me pause for a moment and ask you, are you sensible of the grace of God that has invited you, and that you have responded to that invitation?  “Kiss the Son, lest he be angry”.  It closes with that beautiful intimation; God is so evangelical, He delights in grace and mercy.  God invites us to share His pleasure in His Son.  My heart is deeply grateful that I have been brought in accord with the heart of God.  We should be increasingly sensible of the grace of God, that our hearts have been put in accord with God's, in appreciation of  His Son; we have kissed Him.  That is just a little sketch of the two psalms.

  Now you come to an experimental psalm, a different one altogether.  It is the first experimental psalm in the book.  It is wonderful to see that the first experimental portion of this book should teach us the lesson of salvation.  It was written when David was suffering under the governmental hand of God.  He was suffering under the hand of God for his sins.  I do not know if you have ever known what it is to be in that position.  If so, and you have judged the state that 
led to it, how good to know that you can find refuge in that blessed God.  It is a very sweet thing if you think of this psalm as true of the remnant in the future.

  The voices are clamouring, “There is no help for him in God”.  “Help” should be translated “salvation - it is the same word in the Hebrew.  Now what is to be done?  He says in the midst of it all, “Thou
, O Lord, art a shield for me”.  He is under pressure, but he looks up to God, and he cries with his voice.  Mark: it is with his voice, not with words.  If you pray to God at a time when your soul is under pressure, it takes the form of unexpressed breathings rather than audible words.  Do you know what it is to be absolutely shut up to God?  He cries with his voice, and is heard out of His holy hill.  He is heard from the previous psalm, where Christ is.  Now, beloved friends, that is a very precious thing.  He is heard from that spot where Christ is, the hill of Zion, which is a hill of grace.  Salvation is known there.  Stephen is a beautiful example of it.  He is an example in Christianity of the truth of this psalm.  Look at him, he looks stedfastly up into heaven.  He says, 
‘I see the glory of God and Jesus’.  In that courthouse there was not one friendly face.  He was absolutely alone, and 
every voice said, “There is no help for him in God”.  In spite of this, he gazes ste
adfastly up into heaven.  He was sustained from heaven, and he was heard.  Salvation comes from heaven.

  The Psalmist says, “I laid me down and slept; I awaked; for the Lord sustained me”.  It is our privilege to have the peace of that place where Christ is, in our hearts.  There was not a flutter in the presence of God, and there was not a flutter in Stephen's heart; that is salvation.  I am an object of interest to Christ where He is, as I stand for Him where He was.  I am no match for the storm, but I have a power that will enable me to stand.

  Now take that verse, “if thou shalt confess … Jesus as Lord”: God has made Him both Lord and Christ.  He is Lord to subdue me and to bless me.  If I think of lordship, I think of His subduing power and of administration.  Now a Christian is one who confesses Jesus as Lord.  That is continuously characteristic of a Christian.  It is not the thought of a Christian confessing to other people, though that is in it.  What you want to do is to confess to Him.  If you make the confession to Him, you make the confession to other people as well.  You confess Jesus to be your Lord.  It was Jesus who loved you and died for you.  He is Lord and Christ.  I will speak of Him in the latter aspect directly.

  Now, beloved friends, I want to speak to you in a practical way.  Do you cultivate the habit of calling on Jesus as your Lord?  You have come under His control.  In Acts 9, that great lordship chapter, Saul says, “Who art thou, Lord?” in reply to the Lord saying, “Why persecutest thou me?” Lower down in the chapter the Lord’s voice is again heard.  This time it is to Ananias; He tells him to seek out Saul.  Ananias is near the Lord, and therefore knows when he is called.  The Spirit is here, but what for?  No man can confess Jesus as Lord but by the Spirit.  He is Lord to you, you are under His control, but you must keep up the connection.  Permit an illustration.  Look at the electric tram car, and notice the little copper wheel which runs along under the wire.  What happens if the little copper wheel slips off?  Both the light and power go out because the connection is lost.  It is a great thing to keep up the connection.  There is light and power in the confession of Jesus as Lord.  We have got the power here, but that power is known in the confession of Jesus as Lord.  What you want to do is to keep the little copper wheel under the wire, and then you can say, “The Lord is my light and my salvation”.  Therefore salvation is 
the great key to this psalm.  Now one more remark in connection with this word “salvation”.  

  It is a very interesting thing to see that when you get a thing mentioned for the first time in scripture you get a very good idea of it.  The first time this subject is mentioned is in Genesis 49, and it comes out there in connection with Jacob’s blessing of the twelve tribes.  You get God’s history of His earthly people from start to finish in that chapter.  When Jacob comes to Dan, which is Antichrist, he says, “Dan 
shall be a serpent by the way”.  The moment he touches that terrible Satanic power, of which the Psalms so largely speak, he says, “I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord”.  What comes next?  “Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last”.  Why is this?  Because salvation is there.  There is a turning-point where he says, “I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord”.  That is salvation from the Satanic influences here.  He cries out in the spirit of the remnant.  Jacob looks to the top.  Well, it is very sweet to me that salvation is for us.  I thought to have taken it up more in detail, but time will not permit.  “Salvation belongeth unto the Lord, 
thy blessing is upon thy people”. 
  Now listen to this, “The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God”.  I cannot direct my heart into the love of God, but if I ask Him to do it He will.  That is salvation for you.  It works out in this way: we come into living contact with the Lord.  If you come to a meeting like this, it is no good unless you look to the Lord.  We like to go to meetings and hear the truth, but what we want is to be brought into living contact with the Lord.  There is a great deal we listen to, and find pleasure in listening to it, but unless we come under His influence it is of no use to us.  Therefore we must be under the influence of the Lord and come into contact with Him.  He can direct our hearts into the love of God.

  What should I do in the midst of the turmoil here?  Everything around speaks of man's will working on all sides.  Beloved friends, there is no wreckage at the top.  If the Lord is pleased to remove His gifts, as He often is, what are you going to do? where can we look but to the Lord?  He has not failed us.  All we need to do is to keep in touch with Him and we shall get all our need met on the one hand, and shall recognise what He raises up on the other.  Let us look up to the Lord and keep close to Him, and we shall see what He will do.  He will not distinguish men in the flesh, but rather extinguish them.  “There is a lad here, which hath five 
barley loaves, and two small fishes”; see what the Lord can do with the lad.  He will not give His glory to another.  Our poor hearts often lean on props; we must value His gifts, but still we must not lean on any prop, but on the Lord.  He will never leave us.  His hands have never gone down, like Moses’.  His heart is never wearied, as we often sing, 
‘Thou weariest not, most blessed Lord, though we may weary grow’.  Let us take courage and remember that salvation is of the Lord.

  Now in Psalm 4 we get the way of righteousness, and the two compensations found in that way.  Let me tell you that the way of righteousness can only be known as we abide in the righteous One.  We take character from Him.  We must come under His blessed influence, otherwise we shall not go His way.  I will repeat a little parable I heard lately to illustrate this.  There is no effort in Christianity, but there is energy, and I would distinguish between effort and energy.  I tried to be like Christ, and it was weary work.  Trying made me feel that I would rather die than live.  Now I will come to my parable, it is this.  The sea cried and said, 
‘Oh that I could reach to the heavens’.  She said, 
‘O wind, help me’.  So the wind said, 
‘I will help you’, and it blew till the sea rose higher, and went up into the air, and then down it came again.  The sea fell back and said, 
‘I shall never reach it’.  Just at this moment the sun shone out and said, 
‘Lie still, and I will draw you up.  I will do it all for you if you will keep under my influence
’.  This illustrates my point.  You receive the Spirit from Christ in order that you may abide in Him.

  Now I am going to shew you what it is to be in the way of righteousness, and secondly, the two compensations found in that way.  In Psalm 4 it says: “Hear me when I call ... thou hast enlarged me when I was in distress [or pressure]”.  The first verse stands by itself.  If we want to be enlarged, the Lord does it by putting us under pressure.  That is God's way of doing it.  Believe me, if a man is going to be in the good of the thing, he has got to go through it.  Do not shrink away from the thought of being put under pressure.  The pressure will be different to you and to me.  God knows what each one will feel.  You must not look at His ways with others to understand His ways with you.  Thou has enlarged me under distress or pressure - the word really means pressure.

  Now let me shew you the way of righteousness for the Christian.  We want to see the moral force of it; it is not paying twenty shillings in the pound.  If you do that, everybody will say, 
‘Well done’.  No Christian 
should do less than that, for it is a terrible thing to get into debt.  But, beloved friends, that is only the edge of Christian righteousness.

  I may be doing the thing which every one in this town would commend; and yet it would be positively unrighteous before God.  The Christian's righteousness is to be consistent with what God has made him.  If God has been gracious to me, and I am not a gracious man, I am unrighteous.  If He has shewn mercy to me, I must be merciful.  If I seek my own glory, I am unrighteous.  I will give you a verse that proves that, “He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory: but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him”.  (John 7: 18)

  May the Lord give us a tender conscience before Him as to this, for the moment you have a thought in your heart of self-exaltation, you are unrighteous to Him.  You exalt yourself at the expense of Christ, and that is moral degradation.  You say, 
‘Lord, unless Thou dost help me, I cannot preach to-night’.  You tell the Lord that you are number five, that is the number of weakness, and then He will put number seven to you and make you strong.  Then you have been supported, and He has done it all, then you will begin to think 
‘What a fine fellow I am!’  You do not say it, but it works in your heart.  Christianity touches the inward springs.  Every bit of self-exaltation is primitive unrighteousness to Christ.  Righteousness is to seek the glory of Him who sent Him.  I believe in Christ-consciousness.  When you are Christconscious, you will abandon yourself.

  Now the first compensation in the way of righteousness is that your heart is assured before Him, because you have an uncondemning conscience, and therefore like the Psalmist you know your prayer is heard.  The second is that you are in the light of His countenance. (Ps 4: 6)  I am under righteous obligation to you; it works out in many ways.

  When a man once came to me to collect the taxes, I said to him, ‘You are a minister of God’.  You are to recognise what God has instituted.  Righteousness is to answer to the love of God, in showing it to one another.  “O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame?”  What is the answer to that?
  
It is this, “But know that the Lord hath set apart him that is godly for himself: the Lord will hear when I call unto him”.  Now what is the next compensation?  Turn to verse 6, “Who will show us any good?” Every unconverted man and every carnally-minded 
Christian is asking that.  Where is good to be found?  The One who sought the glory of Him who sent Him can give it to you.  It is found in being in the light of His countenance: “Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us”.  Do you think corn and wine will make you happy?  No, corn and wine will not make you happy, but the light of His countenance will.  And you get that in the way of righteousness.  You have the sense of His approval, and you are in the sunshine of His favour.  This is a Neginoth psalm, that is, a stringed instrument psalm.  I like stringed instrument music.  With the wind instruments there is effort, that is why it represents the prayer meeting, we bring our needs and wants to God.  The music from a stringed instrument is the sweetest; when you play on that, you are not conscious of wanting anything; you have nothing to pray for, but only to praise.  The proposal in verse 6 is that God will put His love into my heart by the Spirit, that I shall not want anything I have not got.  “I will both lay me down in peace”, &c.  That is the rest of satisfaction, which is known in the light of His countenance.  “I laid me down and slept”, (Psalm 3: 5), that is the rest connected with trouble.  Men said to the Lord when He was here, that He had nothing to show, but He had.  He had the sense of God's approval, and gladness in His heart.  When we are there, we forget ourselves.

  I advise you to read the Book of Habakkuk; you will see it is different from all the other prophets.  It has no date, and in that respect it is like the Psalms.  In this book the prophet begins with weeping, and ends with singing.  He feels the state of ruin which surrounds him; how could it be possible for any one walking with God not to feel the ruin of things here?  Habakkuk says, 
‘What shall I do?’  Then the Lord takes him up into the tower, and shows him Christ.  Now his heart begins to rejoice.  Later on, the weeper becomes a preacher, and his text is, “the just shall live by faith”.  Then he prays, and says, “Revive thy work, O Lord”. 

  It will make you cry out, “Revive thy work, O Lord”, when you see that the testimony of the Lord will not fail.  Habakkuk plays the sweetest music at the end.  If you begin with weeping, you will end with singing.  You could not sing if you thought of the desolation here, but the moment you get your eye on Christ you can sing.  The beloved apostle played the stringed instrument in the gaol at Philippi.  He said, “Rejoice in the Lord alway”, &c.  He said, 
‘I cannot preach Christ, but I can enjoy him’. 
  Sometimes we have to be taken aside because we are too big and too busy to be loved.  If the jailor was present when that letter was read to the Philippians, I can imagine him saying to his wife, 
‘Paul is the same man as when he was playing on the stringed instrument in the prison, years ago’.  It is the continuity of the man which I so like.  What made him sing praises to God?  It was because he was in the way of righteousness, in the way of seeking the Lord's glory.  Now I trust you will learn some little lessons by these remarks, though I feel the fragmentary way in which I have put it.

_______________
  
“THE BLESSING OF A FIXED HEART”
Psalm 114  and 116: 1

  The gist of what I am about to say to you can be presented in a few sentences.  It is this, the work of God for us at the cross and the work of God in us by His Spirit, and the ways of God with us down here, are the activities of His love in order to bring us into the light of His purpose for us that we might have the blessing of a “fixed heart”. 

  Now perhaps you will say, why do you choose the Psalms for such a subject?  Of course, I must refer to Christian scriptures, I mean those scriptures of the New Testament which bring out Christianity.  I will bring it into the psalm as I open it up; God's ways with His earthly people set forth very largely in type His thoughts for us.  All scripture is written for us and for our instruction.  In the Psalms, properly speaking, we are not contemplated.  You do not get Christianity in the Psalms, but you get the blessing of God's earthly people in the latter day.  You get great principles in the Psalms which are very helpful.  Some of us have said, 
‘Ah! it does not apply to us, but to God's earthly people’; but I believe we have sadly neglected this book, and lost thereby.  What I like in the Psalms is, that you have what is moral as well as dispensational, and it is connected with the experience of the soul.  Dear Christians, our great danger is being too theoretical; the truth is given to us for practice.  

  I want to know how these blessed doctrines work out in the history of my soul.  That is why I turn to the Psalms, because it is presented there in a very beautiful way.  Now I would like to make this remark.  Any one reading this psalm must be struck with the triumphant tone of it.  This psalm was, I believe, sung before the Passover; indeed, the three psalms, 113, 114 and 115, were all sung before the Passover.  Psalms 116 to 118 are the psalms they sing after the Passover.  Psalm 118 was probably sung when they went up the Mount of Olives  Jesus could sing going up the Mount of Olives, with death before Him: “I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord”
8. 
  Psalm 114 is a very triumphant one, as the most casual reader must see.  It sets forth God's great triumph for Israel and for us.  When God brought His earthly people out of Egypt, He had two great thoughts in view.  These two great thoughts are set forth in the second verse of our psalm: “Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion”. (v 2)  They 
are that He should dwell with them, and reign over them, and these two thoughts come out in the song of the Red Sea.  In the song of the Red Sea they rise up to these two thoughts.  What I want to shew you is this: in the Red Sea and Jordan you get the power of death, and that was lying across the path of God in connection with His purpose for His people.  Now I have come to the point.  It is a wonderful link, that that which was a witness of God’s judgment now becomes the everlasting witness of His love through His blessed Son.  Death was here and claimed all.  Think of it, dear Christians, death was the strongest thing here.  The eater and the strong one was death, but there came down in the person of the Son of God that which was stronger than death.  He brought the holy love of God into this world.  Who but a divine Person could bring the love of God here?  What a wonderful thing that He lit up this dark world with the love that gave Him and sent Him!  He came from the abode of love into this world, and He brought the light of God's love into it.  On He went in grace, He alone was competent to do it.  We discover who He is by what He wrought.  He has been into death, and He has lit up the darkness of death by the holy love of God.  In this, God was saying in unmistakable language to us, 
‘I want you to know Me, in order that you may love Me and live to Me’.  The greatness of the gospel lies in the word “revelation” - God revealed.  He has been pleased to reveal Himself.  In every step of love’s blessed journey God was saying in unmistakable language, 
‘I want you to know Me’.  Our blessing now and evermore lies in the knowledge of God.  Death had to give way; both the Red Sea and the Jordan had to give way because God was there.  Let us come now to what it typified.  Samson's riddle (“Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness”) was God's great riddle, and only One was competent to solve it.  The blessed Jesus, the Son of God, solved the riddle.  He has done it.  He set forth in the dark and distant spot the infinite blessedness of what God is.  That which was the witness of His judgment now becomes the everlasting witness of His heart.  Such a God is surely worthy to be loved, and to be lived to, now and for ever.  Now my point is this, that the first part of the triumph of God is that He makes death to be the witness of His love.  I wish you could say it, dear Christians, that in the death of Christ you have lost yourselves and found God.  In the death of Christ I see God's perfect answer to all that I am.  He has ended my sad history in His death.  If I think of the cross, I think of another psalm: “Thou hast searched me, and known me”.  Where was 
that?  At the cross.  There I was exposed, and God was disclosed.  So that God has given an answer in the death of Christ to all that I am as a natural man.  That death entitles me to turn from myself to God - a very good exchange.  What constitutes my happiness is that I know God.

  Now the other part of the triumph is that He turns the rock into standing water, and the flint into a fountain of waters.  There you see the other side.  It is to make our hearts responsive to His love.  And for the Christian to love is to live, and to live is to love.  The first answer in us to the love of God is to respond to that love.  

  The first action of the life of Christ is Godward in holy love.  And when a man begins to love God he begins to live.  Only the Spirit of God is competent to make my heart answer to the love of God.  That is how the love is put into our hearts.  Now, beloved friends, that is the triumph of God.  He says of Israel, 
‘I will take all the trouble with you, because I want your love.  I sent My Son, and He took love’s journey, all because I want your love
’.  Therefore He will have His earthly people to love Him by-and-by.  That is the reason I have read the first verse of Psalm 116, “I love the Lord”.  The hearts of His people answer back.  This is the first time you get in the Psalms the words, “I love the Lord”.  God has gained the hearts of His people, and they say, “I love the Lord”.  Therefore we must be drawing near to the end of the Book of Psalms; Psalm 118 is the close of the book as to subject matter.

  Now let me give you a Christian scripture, and may it lead you to prayer, that you may realise it.  “Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again: but whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life”.  Oh! the grandeur of that!  I put it to you, do you think the Son of God would tantalise us with impossibilities?  The water that I shall give him, &c., what does that mean?  That my heart in the power of the Spirit shall well up in answer to the holy love of God; that I shall be delivered from lust, that is, I shall not wish for a thing I have not got; something that shall satisfy our hearts in such a way that we shall not wish for a thing we have not got.  The work of God in us by the Spirit is to make our hearts responsive to that love.  “He breathed on them, 
and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit”.  He breathed His own life into them that you and I might answer to His 
love.  Say to yourself, that is God's thought for me.  Do not look at yourself, but at the grandeur of the proposal.

  I will give you a few instances from Psalm 116 of how the hearts of His people turn back to Him.  “Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee”.  “I will pay my vows unto the Lord”, &c.  But the lever to the whole psalm is “I love the Lord”.  “The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free”, &c., the law of the Spirit of life is to love God.  The law of sin and death is to love myself.  Permit an illustration.  I say to you I love my mother, I revere her memory.  That love I have for her never started with me, it started with her.  Let God love you into loving Him back again.  Let the cross be the lesson book from which you learn it.  “The love of God shed abroad in our hearts”, &c., that is love realised.  Our hearts are made responsive.  Do not look into your heart, you will not see it there.  A man once said to me, 
‘I am waiting for the blessing’.  I said, 
‘What is the blessing you are waiting for?’  
‘I am waiting for the love of God to be shed abroad in my heart’, he replied.  I asked him for the passage, but he did not know.  I took my Bible and showed him Romans 
5: 5.  He stopped reading at the end of the verse.  I said, 
‘Read on’.  “For when we were yet without strength ... God commendeth his love towards us”, &c.  That is where you see it not in yourself.  When God speaks of realised love, He points to where the love can be seen, that it may be kept up.  “In this was manifested the love of God toward us” (1 John 4: 9), look there and see it.  If we are exhorted to love one another, we are shown where the love was manifested, that there may be a realisation of it, and then there will be the exhibition of it.  That is as simple as daylight.  Love was manifested toward us in order that it might be realised in us.  And realised in us to be exhibited by us.  We love up to God, and out to the brethren.  We love the begotten ones because we love Him who begat.

  Now I am going to another subject: the ways of God with us.  Turn to Psalm 107: 43.  Also the first verse of the next psalm.  These two psalms are dovetailed.  My third point was the ways of God with us.  “Whoso is wise, and will observe these things”, that is the way of God with us.  “
Even they shall understand the loving-kindness of the Lord”, the love of God is behind all His ways with us.
  Beloved brethren, we miss a lot through not seeing that God's love is behind all His ways with us.  In Psalm 107 you get God's ways with His 
people, and the psalm touches the history of every child of God that ever lived in this world.  The first nine verses are the first section - they give the ways of God.  You find God’s people are “in a solitary way”, and they are “hungry and thirsty”.  Well now, God brings them into a dwelling-place, and He satisfies their hunger and thirst.  He creates the desire in His people, and He satisfies that desire; These are His normal ways with His people.  “He satisfieth the longing soul”, &c., there is comfort for you.  He will do it for you.  If He creates in your heart the hunger and thirst, He does it in order to meet it.  “You have 
as much of Christ as you want”, an aged servant of God once said.
  Let us read verse 10: “Such as sit in darkness”, &c., they got there through their self-will.  They ceased to be simple, and took matters into their own hand.  Then they come under the government of God.  Here are these people sitting in affliction and iron, because they rebelled against the words of God.  Is there not a lot of rebellion?  Christianity is exceedingly simple, but we are not simple about it.  We think we can do better for ourselves than God can do for us, but that will lead us into affliction and sorrow.  Let us read on: “He brought down their heart with labour”, &c.  If we make mistakes through lack of nearness to God, we have to suffer the consequences, but He hears our cry.  “Then they cried unto the Lord, and he heard them”.  He will hear 
us, not according to our cry, but according to Christ's cry.  He has heard His cry.  Cherish that in your heart.  He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, He did hear their cry.  “Praise the Lord
 … for he hath broken the gates of brass”. That is section No. 2.
  Section No. 3 begins, “Fools because of their transgression”, &c. (vv 17-22)  Here it is more folly than rebellion.  They cry unto the Lord, and He hears them.  Verse 22 finishes section 3.  Now they are getting back and they sacrifice the sacrifice of thanksgiving.

  Section 4 begins with the seafaring people.  
They go down to the sea in ships.  What does this mean?  It means that Israel go down to the sea of nations, and they are tossed about to this very day.  For us, it means that there are things that are legitimate for me, subject to the will of God.  I may want a little home of my own - that is, I am launching a little bark on the sea.  Very well, “Such shall have trouble in the flesh”.  He will raise the storm.  You reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man - do you ever know what it is to feel like that?  You are at your wit's end, and you 
cry to the Lord, If He raises the storm, He can bring you to the calm.  I have got my little bark out on the sea every day of the week, and I need priestly grace and support.

  I know what it is to steer my little bark into the desired haven (the assembly), and there I  drop my anchor.  Look at verse 32.  “Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the assembly of the elders”; there is the assembly in principle.  You have your home circle, etc., your little ship is on the sea, and up and down you go; but mind you, you may have God with you.  He will teach you in these things what a blessed God He is.  He will bring your bark into the haven and you drop your anchor and you praise Him in the assembly.  When there, I say, 
‘Lord, I have felt your touch in the week, and your support, and now I leave my place, and come to you in your place’.  Then the remainder of the psalm is a recital of God's governmental ways.  Now I come to the last verse - it is the moral conclusion: “Whoso is wise and will observe these things”, what shall they do?  They shall understand the loving-kindness of the Lord, which is behind it all.  Observe His ways with you.  If people had very easy times down here, they would be very uninteresting people.

  Directly I see the storm rising, I say, I will watch that man, God is going to make a man of him.  The crying need of the moment is for experimental and practical ministry.  You can learn doctrine, and recite it clearly if you have a good memory.  If you are going to be a man of God, He will put you through your paces.

  Now my heart begins to say, “O God, my heart is fixed”. (Ps 108: 1)  
God has been pleased to take the halves of two psalms and stitch them together in Psalm 108 God emphasises by repetition.  The purpose of God is in Psalm 108.  If God takes all that trouble with you He must have some purpose for you.  I repeat my little motto.  It is this, 
‘I had to come here, because I had to go there”.  Many a time I say it.  l had to come into this world, because I had to go there.  That is God's purpose for me - that is my business - “O God, my heart; is fixed
’.  Caleb says in principle, “O God, my heart is fixed”.  I say, 
‘But, Caleb, you have the manna, and the palm-trees, and the water out of the rock’.  
‘Thank God’, says he but listen to me, “O God, my heart is fixed”.  “I brought him word again as it was in mine heart”
, Josh 14: 7.
  Let me give you New Testament language for a fixed heart.  “All things work together for good to them that love God”.  All His ways work together for good to those that love God, and are called according to His purpose.  Many a time I have watched a piece of driftwood washed up on shore being tossed to and fro by the waves.  I have said to myself, 
‘That is often just like you, it is washed up and then washed back again - you are a creature of circumstances at such times’.  On the other hand, I have seen a huge ironclad riding majestically upon the waves.  I would prefer to be like the ironclad, rather than like the piece of wood tossed at the mercy of the waves.  Look at the ironclad - that is, “O God, my heart is fixed”.  It is the light of His purpose that fixes our heart.  “One thing I do”, etc.  Mary came and sat at the Lord's feet; that sets forth what I mean.  She sat at His feet to get her heart fixed.  The “good part” is to sit at His feet.  To her God was saying, “This is my beloved Son: hear ye him
” - “hear Him”, not serve Him, like Martha.  Be a Mary to-night, and get your heart fixed.  He said, 
‘Mary, you are wanted in the spot where I came from’.  Beloved Christians, you are wanted in heaven.  The Son came because the Father wanted you in that spot.  When that gets into your heart, your heart will be fixed.  It will teach you how to pray  “Father, hallowed be thy name”, etc.  It is not Me, My, Mine; but Thee, Thy, Thine.  Normal prayer is Thee, Thy, Thine.

  Look at Ps 108: 7, and I will close.  God hath spoken in His holiness; He said, “I will rejoice; I will divide Shechem”, etc.  Gilead is mine; you may say they have turned out a bad lot, still He says, 
‘They are mine’.  “Moab is my washpot”, God will wash His people through Moab.  Philistia, I will triumph over you - that is the triumph of God.  I do not wonder at the close of the psalm, “Through God we shall do valiantly”.  Why you are not victorious in conflict is because you do not sing.  The man whose heart is fixed is the man who sings.  The Lord send you away with the sense in your soul that you are the object of the purpose of God.  May you be able to say, “Through God we shall do valiantly”.  In conclusion, I would say again what I said at the outset, that the work of God for us at the cross, and His work in us by His Spirit, and His ways with us are to bring us into the light of His purpose, that we may know the blessing of a fixed heart.  May you know it.

_____________________
  
RECOVERED FOR GOD’S PLEASURE BY CHRIST AS HEAD
  I may say, dear friends, I had no thought when I came here that I should be speaking in this way this evening.  There has not been much time for exercise, but it seems to me that it would be well to go over what we had before us this afternoon, that we may be more distinctly impressed with the importance of the subject.  Therefore I propose to go over the same scriptures, and will first read Luke 9: 28-36.

  The remark was made this afternoon that the expression in 1 Corinthians 11, “The Head of Christ is God”, would fittingly cover the thought of this blessed book.  That is, what we have preeminently before us in Luke's gospel is a Man who has God for His Head.  It is a great thing to see a main thought of any part of Scripture as we read it.

  I see in Luke's gospel the presentation of Man to God in Christ.  It is the way God proposes to recover man for His pleasure: He will do it by the Head whom He has appointed.  I ask the youngest Christian here, Do you rejoice in the thought that God proposes to recover you for His pleasure?  I would like you to entertain that thought, because if you do, you will desire to know the truth of Christ as Head; God proposes to recover you for His pleasure in the life of another Man.  That is the character of this gospel; it is the presentation of Man to God, whereas John's gospel is the presentation of God to men in a Man.  The two gospels fit thus very well together.

  What we have here is illustrated in the incident in 2 Kings 6: 5-7; the axe head was lost, but it was recovered for the owner.  Luke’s gospel is the axe-head gospel.  The axe head was lost, it went down into Jordan; but by the side of the river there was a beautiful tree, the Man of God’s pleasure in the scene of death.  You and I were lost to God away down in the mud of self-love.  That is the most degrading thing possible, for it leaves no room for God.  I was the axe head lost, and I was down in the mud of self-love, self-complacency, and self-glorification.  Would to God we felt it!  The nearer you come to Christ the more you feel by contrast what moral degradation is.  He is entirely opposite to us, speaking of ourselves as children of Adam.  The nearer you get to Christ, and the more you know His perfections, the more you know the true character of the man who never answered to God.  You do not measure him by what is 
outward, but by what is inward.  I was a degraded creature, I did not love God, I loved myself.

  God lost me, and He felt the loss; and His proposal is to recover me for His pleasure in the life of another Man, by the Man who grew there for God’s pleasure.  He went down into death, into Jordan, and came up the other side in order that He might be our Head; because, remember, He is Head for man in resurrection.  He must die; He must come on the resurrection platform, or He could not be our Head.  He must meet the whole question of our condition, and our liabilities.  “In that He died, He died unto sin once: but in that He liveth, He liveth unto God”.  He always lived to God, but He now lives to God as having died to sin in order that we might live to God in His blessed life.

  Let me say to you, young or old, that your happiness lies in living to God.  You cannot be happy merely in the thought that you are going to heaven when you die, or that the Lord will receive you when He comes; Christian happiness lies in living to God.  That is the reason why very few of us are really happy Christians; for happiness lies in living to God, in the sense that you are giving God pleasure.  Would that we were exercised about it, then we should feel the necessity of having Christ as our Head.  Our danger is in having things as a beautiful theory, and finding pleasure in the consideration of them, without being exercised to get the good of them.  These things cannot be known unless there is true exercise of soul.  You must get with God, you must get your spiritual exercise with God, you - cannot live on God's servants.  Many of us live on other people’s spirituality, but you must have a history of your own.  There is no help from a gift or servant unless you are exercised.  I beg your consideration of that.  I feel the danger of living on other people's experience and exercises; you must have 
your own individual history and exercises.
  And there is another thing: unless you at your little meeting, where the will of God has put you, are finding the sufficiency of Christ, you will not get the true gain of any special ministry that may be sent by the Lord.  When you know the sufficiency of Christ in the meeting where you are, that He is sufficient for you there, and you are exercised in regard to it, then you will reap benefit when the Lord is pleased to send you special ministry.  Do not refuse the present ministry, the ministry the Holy Ghost 
has raised up, but see that you get the true benefit of it by being exercised before the Lord in the meeting where you are gathered.
  Have you got an idea of the importance of living for God’s pleasure?  The angels might envy us.  To be for the pleasure of God down here in this world in the midst of contrarieties is one of the most glorious things.  Oh, that we were alive to it!  Oh, that we had desires in our hearts to live to God!  Then we should find what headship really means.  My thought is what it is for us now, how we should be recovered for the pleasure of God, if we knew Christ in this way.

  I would just touch another point which comes out in this Gospel, and that is, the angels were in sympathy with what was going on.  How sweet it is to find when the Man for God's pleasure was seen here, to grow up for His delight, that “suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God”.  God would have His creatures in sympathy with Him in whatever He does.  There was an outburst from the heavenly host.  Think of it, beloved friends!  The earth was silent, save those in whom the Spirit had wrought, but heaven was not silent.  There had come to pass the happy answer to the question, “What is man
, that Thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that Thou visitest him?  For Thou hast made him a little lower than the angels”; but the angels were in accord with God, and therefore they burst out in acclamation, “Glory to God in the highest, 
and on earth peace, good pleasure in men”.  Think of it beloved friends, these pure beings never had thought for themselves; they burst out in unselfish joy.  God did not tell them to do it.  “Suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host
, praising God”.  I like that immensely; it was an outburst of unselfishness.  In the ages that were past they had seen creation unfold before their delighted gaze, and had shown their joy in creatorial power and goodness.  Now there is a deeper note.  In fact, they see God for the first time, they see God manifest in flesh; and they see Man for the pleasure of God.  How deep was the note, how true!  How they were in intelligence and sympathy with God!  Holy beings they were, and never thought of themselves.  They were not like the one who had been of their number, and thought of himself and lost God, to be a degraded creature for ever.  The devil sinned from the outset; the moment he thought of himself he became a wreck, he was not held to God.  But these holy beings were held to God, and there was an outburst in sympathy with what was coming to pass in this world.  God’s good pleasure in men was set forth in Jesus.  A Man had come here 
to have God for His Head, and thus to be qualified to be Head of God's universe of bliss.  As Man He is qualified to be Head.  It says in Zechariah, “He shall grow up out of His place” - out of the place of Israel’s departure and of our departure there has grown up One who is qualified to rule; “He shall build the temple of the Lord; and He shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon His throne; and He shall be a priest upon His throne”.  “He shall grow up out of His place” - who can contemplate that without joy?  In the very place of our misery and degradation there has grown up a Man for God 's pleasure.

  I come now to the centre of this precious gospel.  At the beginning Luke says, I write to set things in order for you - “It seemed good to me also ... to write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, that thou mightest know the certainty of those things, wherein thou hast been instructed”.  He writes under the Spirit's guidance in beautiful order, and the climax of these synoptic gospels is always found in the transfiguration.  If I were confining myself to this beautiful passage I should have begun at the 18th verse.  If I had to write a title over it I should write this, ‘A journey from the speculations of men to the appreciation of the Father’.  He was alone in prayer.  He was feeling the state of men's hearts, that they were glad to have need met, but no one cared to know the Benefactor!  They were glad to have the blessing, but no one cared to know the Blesser.  Of course they were glad to have their need met, glad to be fed.  He does meet our need, thank God, but there is more than this.  He knew they were glad to be fed, but He said, Did they not care to know Me, to know who I was in My Person?  If you make Christ an accommodation for yourself, that you may escape the peril you are in, and through Him secure eternal happiness, you are making yourself the centre all the time.  But He does what He does, and gives what He gives, in order that He may reveal what He is, and everything blessed lies in the knowledge of what He is.

  We love Thee for the glorious worth
  Which in Thyself we see. 
  Does no one care to know Me?  “He asked them, saying, Whom say the people that I am?  They answering said, John the Baptist; but some say, Elias; and others say
, that one of the old prophets is risen again”.  Then He says, But what do you say? Peter says - he is the confessor always - “The Christ of God” - the Man who has God for His Head!  In 
Matthew it says, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God”; in Mark, “Thou art the Christ”; in Luke, “The Christ of God”.  Mark the perfection of Scripture!  “The Christ of God” furnishes you with the key to the whole gospel of Luke.  Well then, He says, I am going to suffer and be killed; I am the Son of man.  A wider glory opens out.  He is not only the Christ of God, but the Son of man, who is going to suffer any things; He instructs them in the suffering goal to which He was moving on.  No one can face the suffering goal unless he is in the presence of the glory goal.  The way to glory is through suffering, and the power for suffering is found as we are in the presence of the glory.  Christianity is suffering, but it is glory that enables you to suffer.  “There be some standing here which shall not taste of death till they see the kingdom of God”.  How beautiful the unfolding that the kingdom of God is seen in a kneeling Man, a Man who has God for His Head!  And the Man who has God for His Head must be found in reverence and trust.  He 
kneels; that is the true expression of the glory of man.  The true glory of man is to trust God, therefore He kneels in prayer.  Many times did I read it, and thought of the fashion of His countenance being altered, and His raiment being white and glistening; but the time came when I saw the kneeling Man, and my heart was arrested.  His moral beauty is seen there; the kingdom of God expressed in a Man governed by what is suitable to God.  The kingdom of God is the moral apprehension you have by the Spirit of what is suitable to God known in grace.  The great principle of the kingdom is sovereign grace, sovereign mercy; when you are governed by what is suitable to God, God's kingdom is set up in your heart.  A short definition of it would be, God-consciousness instead of self-consciousness.  I am God conscious, conscious of God known in grace, and my heart is governed by what is suitable to God , and I come thus into His pleasure.  If I am governed by what is suitable to God, I am agreeable to God.  He has recovered me for His pleasure.

  I will now refer again to the scriptures that we had before us this afternoon.  The first was Luke 7: 38, “She ... stood at His feet behind Him weeping, and began to wash His feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed His feet”.  That is the first blessed introduction to Him.  It shows the way in which Christ endears Himself to us.  He sets forth beautifully the situation of grace on God's part - “when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both”; but to me the commanding thought of the passage is the way in which the grace of God 
comes out in a Man, so that that Man endears Himself to us.  “Seest thou this woman?”  What a wonderful thing it is that we learn to love Him by His feet, because “beautiful ... are the feet of Him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace”!  He had brought the glad tidings of the grace of God to her in her need; He was the vessel, the expression of that grace, and His feet were beautiful in her eyes.  She washed His feet with her tears.  Do you know anything about that?

  No one ever loved the Lord Jesus apart from righteousness.  I would say to parents here, You cannot teach your child to love the Lord Jesus as your child is taught to love you.  It must be through an awakened conscience and on the line of righteousness.  It is possible to clothe Christ with sentiment, just as Ritualists clothe the cross of Christ with sentiment and entwine it with flowers; we may do it with our feelings, and in this way the flesh may pride itself on its feelings about Christ without any conscience work.  But if I approach Christ on the line of righteousness, the affection I have is reverential affection.  I beg your attention to that, it is excessively important.  The only way in which we are taught truly to love Christ is through an awakened conscience.  How possible it is to speak of Christ in beautiful language without any real force in it!  I pray, brethren, that we may be delivered from this kind of thing.

  This woman was taught to love Him; she had come down to where she could find the Christ of God.  It is in your own nothingness you find Him and in the sense of nothingness you are taught to love Him.  She stands in contrast to Simon subjectively 
– ‘I am’ was the language of his heart.  I am skilful, respectable, religious; but she said, 
I am not.  In self-judgment you find Him; you cannot find Him by the activity of your mind, but you will find Him in deepening self-judgment.  That always accompanies the finding of Christ.  She was taught to love Him, and she went away and found the company of those who loved Him.  The first few verses of the 8th chapter set forth beautifully the company of those among whom she was to go and live: she was to be found with the women who ministered to Him.  She was to find her place amongst the company, who were taught in like manner to love the Lord Jesus.

  The next thing is the 35th verse of the 8th chapter.  This man was sitting, clothed in his right mind.  He had been under a frightful domination, but now the kingdom of God is in view, he is sitting, subdued.  Jesus was his Lord and subdued him.  You are glad to be 
subdued by One you love; it is a question of affection.  I say, Yes, He shall subdue me, He is my Lord; at His feet He subdues me.

  What occupied us next was Mary, Luke 10: 39.  Mary sat at His feet to be taught.  That teaching lies in impression.  He impressed her, for He was the living expression of what He said.  She was there under this blessed formative impression.  That is the way we are formed.  If Christ becomes Head to you, you are so impressed by Christ that He forms you; He produces in you correspondence with what is in Himself.  The Apostle Paul says in writing to the Philippians, “Being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God”.  The whole of practical Christianity is in that verse - “by Jesus Christ”, that is the Head, He produces it; and it is to the glory and praise of God, He is the Object of it.

  Beloved brethren, what we want in these busy restless days is power to withdraw ourselves from present things, so that we may come under the influence of Christ as Head.  I cannot explain it to you very well, but I am sure that as you are consciously in His presence, and His perfections are before you, your heart goes out to Him; you love Him, for He has subdued you.  Then you are free to sit at His feet, and take in impressions; and the first comes out in you in the power of the Spirit, you answer to the Person who impresses you.

  Christianity is not a thing of effort, not that I try to be like Christ.  I have tried to be meek and lowly and have been very proud in my trying.  Let me repeat a little parable to show you the good of headship.  The sea out yonder sighed and cried and said, Oh, that I could reach the heavens; it said, Oh, wind, help me to reach the heavens: and the wind blew, and the sea rose up with might y effort.  But down it fell, and sighed again and said, Oh, wind, help me.  And the wind blew again, and the sea leaped up the sides of the cliff; but only to fall back again and again.  Then the poor sea moaned and said, I shall never reach it.  But just then the sun shone out, and the sun said, Lie still, and I will shine on you and draw you up.  That is Mary sitting at His feet.  Beloved brethren, we should seek the shining of Christ; you have to do it for yourself; you must have an individual history, and the shining of Christ on your personal communion.  I may go and listen to all the ministry in the world, but if I fail there it is of no avail.  Mary sat there, and she appeared to her sister as indifferent, because Martha lived hard by the lawyer, the first husband; but Mary was 
married to Another, to bring forth fruit to God.  Am I married to Christ?  Yes, and I may sit down and enjoy all He is.  Have you reached Christ like that?  Trying to be good and trying to be better is weary work.  If you reach this, all you wish to be is found in Him, and He invites you to come and be near Him, and to sit 
down and enjoy Him.  You never expressed a bit of Christ unless you enjoyed Him! What ever you express you have enjoyed in Christ your Head.

  The next thing is, He teaches you how to pray.  I have felt the necessity of this of late.  I do not want to be saying my prayers.  We often say our prayers; they are doctrinally right, scripturally right, but we say our prayers without really getting to God.  We need Christ to teach us how to pray.  If He teaches me how to pray, I shall pray intelligently, I shall pray the right side up.  What will it be? “Hallowed be Thy name.  Thy kingdom come.  Thy will be done”.  That is the order; that is praying the right side up.  There is nothing about you, it is all His side.  That is how Christ teaches us to pray; I do not mean words, or a formula, but that is a moral order of prayer.

  Sweet it is to see Him seven times in prayer in this gospel.  At His baptism; in chap 5, when He is popular, a fame went abroad of Him; He was popular for a moment, but He withdrew Himself into the wilderness and prayed.  He would not be detained by man, He would get alone with God; then in the 6th chapter they hated Him, and “communed one with another what they might do to Jesus”, He went into a mountain to pray; in our chapter here He prays when He is neglected, no one cared to know who He was; on the mountain He knelt in prayer to set forth the kingdom of God; in chap 11 He teaches us how to pray, He was alone praying, and one of the disciples said to Him, “Lord, teach us to pray”, and He taught them; lastly, He prayed in Gethsemane.  He says to poor Peter, “Watch and pray”.  How we have to thank God for all that blessed grace!  How we are led to appreciate it too! He says, “Watch and pray”, but whether you pray for yourself or not, I have prayed for you.

  Let us come close to this truth, “Satan has demanded to have you”; he said to God; that man’s flesh belongs to me, and I will have him.  He demanded to have him; that is the way it is put, but the Lord says, “I have prayed for thee”, that when you get into Satan's hands your faith may not fail you.  He will sift you; “I have prayed for thee”.  Then He drew into that sorrow.  The Mount of Olives is very sweet.  I think it has been said 
by another as to Bethany and the Mount of Olives, that Bethany is where you have the association of the saints, their sympathy and love, but you have to have your Mount of Olives, where no stranger can intrude on your sorrow, or on your joy.  They were a stone’s cast from Him.  The dear saints can only draw near so far, they were a stone's cast from Him.  “Being in an agony He prayed more earnestly”, and to the very place where He prayed in His sorrow His blessed feet will come, on the Mount of Olives.  Do you think of that, dear friends?  When He sweat as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground - in all His true and perfect and holy humanity, deprecating the cup in His perfection - that blessed Man!
  
His feet shall stand by and by on that very Mount of Olives.  He is worthy of it, worthy of everything!

  He had His Gethsemane, and no one can tell what it was to Him, no one can measure it.  You and I have our Gethsemanes, we have our sorrows in which no stranger can come near to us.  The sorrows may be deep and painful and abiding too.  Oh, to have Jesus to come near to you, to hear Him say, I have passed that way.  It is so real, He becomes exceedingly tangible, I say it with reverence.  He can draw near to you, come close to you, though no stranger can inter-meddle with you.  He can say, I can fill up every gap, every breach, and you can look up through your tears into His face, and say, Blessed Lord, I had to come this way to know Thee.  The compensation is great, because we come to the knowledge of Him.  You cannot learn it out of a book, you must learn it out of experience.  So whilst the saints may come within a stone's throw of you! and sweet it is to hear them saying, We weep with you, we sympathise with you, the Lord can come close to you, and make known His blessed love.  That is the good of the Head.  We touch Him now in priestly sympathy.  Oh, how blessed He is! Does He stand up before your soul in His sweet and blessed tangibility?  Does He stand up before you as a Person known to your heart more than any living person on this earth?  That is the good of knowing Christ as Head.  It ceases to be doctrine, it is you know Him.  May God grant that we may know 
Him, beloved brethren.  I feel how poorly I have presented Him to you.

  The other thought was the leper in the 17th chapter; he was on the verge of a discovery  “As they went, they were cleansed”.  They had said, “Jesus, Master, have mercy on us”.  It was an appeal to sovereign mercy.  Such an appeal opens the heart of God.  “Go, show yourselves unto the priests.  And it came to pass, that, as they went, they were 
cleansed”, and one man stopped, he was arrested.  Do you know what that one man represents? The others might have said, Jesus told us to go to the priests.  No, he says, I am not going back to that system of things, that is over for me, I am on the verge of a great discovery.  Have you not got healing? Yes, but I must be at the feet of the Healer.  Back he comes; “he fell down on his face at His feet, giving Him thanks”; he is effaced.  “With a loud voice glorified God”.  There is the kingdom: man effaced, God glorified, and a heart thankful.  Do you know what that is?  The blessing of a thankful heart, God is before you.  The Pharisees came and demanded when the kingdom of God should appear.  The Lord says, It does not come with outward show, it is here in your midst, and this Samaritan has discovered it.  Where did he discover it?  At His feet.  He was cleansed in order to discover the kingdom; he was effaced.  Blessed effacement, where God is all!  In the next chapter I hear a man saying, “God, I thank Thee”.  It sounds like the leper! Wait a bit!  “that I”.  
‘God, I thank Thee that Thou’ - that is God's kingdom, Godconsciousness instead of self-consciousness.
  The blessed Lord then goes on to show that there are three hindrances to God's kingdom: (1) The self-righteous I; (2) The mental I; (3) The I of acquisition.  
These three will keep you out of God's kingdom.  How often this self-righteous I, the mental I, and the I of acquisition or wealth keep us practically out of God's kingdom!  The kingdom of God is what the dear saints need to be in the good of.  It would help us greatly if we knew it better; it would help us in the higher character of things in the assembly too.  If we have no ability to enter into the truth of the kingdom, we shall have no ability to enter into higher things.  If what has come before us produces a desire to enter into these things, my point will be gained.  We have only a few minutes to stay down here.  What are you going to do the remainder of your time?  Seek ye first God's kingdom.  “The kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost”.  Christianity proposes to make me happy in such wise that my happiness shall not depend on my circumstances; that is what I like in Christianity. That is the nature of the proposal in the Gospel. 

  Do you like it?  How it would deliver us from many things that hinder us!  One of the most terrible things is the I of acquisition.  The desire to be rich and the love of money pierces saints through with many sorrows.  If you are in God's kingdom you have a contented mind.  To be in God's kingdom is a testimony, for it is evidence that you have found a spring of 
happiness outside this world.  What a testimony it would be if saints impressed people with the fact that they have abiding peace and joy altogether outside this world!

_______________________
  From an un-dated leaflet
  
THE WAY OUT OF CONFUSION
Psalms 40: 5-10; 41: 12-13; 45: 1-2; 52: 17-20; 53: 16-17
  I want to bring before you the important subject of the way out of confusion.  There is great confusion down here - confusion with regard to our spiritual history, our circumstances, and the house of God.  God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace.  If you go outside and look up to the heavens, you will see no confusion there.  “The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth His handywork” (Psalm 19: 1).  Everything moves in order in the vast universe He has called into existence by the word of His power.  There is confusion here because men have got away from God, and have become lawless.

   If you go back to the beginning there was no confusion.  Man was set in the garden, surrounded by every token of God's goodness; but, falling under evil influences and ceasing to respond to that goodness, he became lawless and a moral wreck.  Satan succeeded in instilling distrust into the heart of the creature.  God is good; the creature was surrounded with every mark of the goodness of God, and He had a perfect right to draw a straight line and say, you must not step over that.  Satan said to God, that man is responding to You: I shall make him respond to me.  God is always Satan's objective.  He throws down the challenge to God, and says, I will repeat myself in this creature.  Satan repeated himself morally in man, as the blessed Lord Himself said: “Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do” (John 8: 44).

  How are people to get out of the confusion?  By getting into God's will.  The confusion has come in by man, but the way out of it has also come by Man.  Let me put it to you in a few sentences: “He was manifested to take away our sins, and in Him is no sin; whosoever abideth in Him sinneth not” (1 John 3: 5, 6).  The Lord Jesus came down into the place of the confusion to end it all, and, to bring the light of God into this world.  In the very first chapter of the New Testament we are introduced to this Person of whom the prophets had spoken.  “Thou shalt call His name Jesus: for He shall save His people from their sins”.  And not only so, but a little lower down you get: “They shall call His name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us”.  Where God is there is no confusion.

  When the confusion came in at the beginning, God, as it were, made haste to speak of another Man.  He says to Satan, You wrought the confusion by man, but I will find a way out of it; the seed of the woman shall bruise thy head.

  God is going to defeat Satan.  He has been pleased to send His dear Son in to the world to teach us to trust God.  The glory of man is to trust God; it is moral degradation in the eye of God that we cannot trust Him.  The seed of distrust was sown in the heart of poor man, when he got under the power of Satan.  In the first book we have the beginning of lawlessness; but in the last book of the Old Testament we find that the Sun of Righteousness was to rise with healing in His wings: and God proposes to change us now by bringing us under the influence of Christ.

  In the first book of Psalms, God has found a Man after His own heart who shall fulfil all His will.  God has found a Man.
  The 40th Psalm is the key to the Book of Psalms, and indeed to all the ways of God: because it brings before us God's will, and God's will lies at the root of all blessing.  It is a fine thing in the history of your soul when you recognise that God is the only One Who has the right to have a will.  

  The 41st Psalm sets before us that blessed Man as set before God's face for ever.  That Man has fulfilled the will of God in His life here, and has gone into death to fulfil the will of God there, that death might be annulled.  There are great men all around who bend everything to their will, but death comes in and moves them off.  It is most pitiful; however high and great a man may be, death finishes him, pulls him down so that he cannot lift his hand to his head.  The great man has to die!  But this blessed Man is set before God's face for ever: and to come out of the confusion, you must come under His influence.
  If it is a question of sins, in that one Man God has set forth a mercy-seat through faith in His blood (Romans 3: 25, N.T.).  He has been into death and has met all the question of our responsibility, and all the claims of God.  The righteousness of God is set forth in Him.  God can exercise mercy, and grace flows down to us on the ground of that one Man who lives before His face.  “He is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for … the whole world” (1 John 2: 2).  That is, there can be an administration of the grace and mercy of God reaching down to the vilest through that blessed Man.  Everything depends upon the Man who lives before God’s face; that Man has died to sin, and lives to God.  By being under the influence of Christ - that is the way out of sin and confusion.
  There is a beautiful expression in verse 5 of Psalm 40, which has an application to Israel, but can also be taken up in a Christian way.  It is where the Psalm begins, properly speaking; you must read the first four verses at the end of the psalm.  Verse 5 begins the subject matter of the psalm: “And Thy thoughts which are to us-ward”.  People have their thoughts towards us, they think of us with affection; but if you knew the thoughts of God towards you, it would alter your thoughts towards Him.  What wealth there is in that sentence!  “His thoughts which are to us-ward”.  They can only be thoughts of good and blessing, not thoughts of evil.

  Where are those thoughts expressed?  God cares for us.  He cares for the sparrows, too, but His thoughts to us-ward are eternal.  If He has eternal thoughts towards me, surely He will take care of me down here.  I recognise the piety which owns the care of God, but the thoughts of God could not be set forth in any favour down here-it is not great enough.  Who could set forth the will of God?  Only one Person - therefore one voice is sweetly heard here.  Could sacrifice and offering set forth the thoughts of God?  No, they are not great enough.  Could the furniture in the tabernacle?  No, the thoughts of God which are to us-ward are set forth in a Man, so we hear Him saying: “Lo, I come” (verse 7).  There is One great enough and competent enough to set forth the thoughts of God.  The blessed God has come down to us in a Man, yet more than a Man: a divine Person who became man, because the very language supposes that He is there with God.  “Lo, I come”! come to set forth Thy thoughts towards Thy people.  “A body hast Thou prepared Me”.  It is all within the compass of a Man, the true Urim and Thummim.

  The names of the tribes of Israel were borne on the breastplate, and in it were the Urim and Thummim (Exod  28:  29, 30).  The Urim means light, and the Thummim means perfection.  All the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell in Him, that is Urim; and “ye are complete in Him” (Col 2: 9, 10) is the Thummim.  It is not merely that I should know my sins forgiven and that I am going to heaven when I die; but the thoughts are that God should be revealed and responded to.  He is going to get what He wants; He will not be thwarted.  Because He is love, He loves to be loved.  Why did He send His Son?  That He might be loved.  You say, He sent Him to put away my sins.  Yes, but there is the other side - the perfect revelation of His love.  If there is any happiness my soul knows - pure unalloyed happiness - it is to love God.  He revealed His love in order that there might be an answer back to Him.  The glory of the blessed God is the Gospel.  His desire is to make Himself known, and that there should be a response from us to what He is.  What we have in the Psalm is that there was a Person great enough to reveal God and great enough to respond to Him.  The revelation lies in the Urim, and the response in the Thummim.  John's gospel is Urim, and Luke's gospel is Thummim.  John gives us the revelation of God in Man, while Luke gives us a perfect Man answering to that revelation.  The blessed God could look down on one Man, and see in the midst of a ruined degraded race in this sad world that there was One who loved God perfectly.  “I delight to do Thy will, O my God: yea, Thy law is within my heart” (verse 8).  God is revealed in Him, because He is God; and there was perfect response in Man because He was the perfect Man, so that the revelation and the response are found in one Person.  God found one heart to beat true to Him every moment here without interruption.  There was one Man down here of whom God could say: “I have found a man
 … after Mine own heart, which shall fulfil all My will” (Acts 13: 22); but He was not available to us till He had died to sin.  He was there in His solitude, in His deep perfection.  That one Man has died to sin, and now He lives to God and we can live to God in Him.

  This is the way out of the confusion, out of lawlessness, out of my own will.  I am so to come under the influence of that one Man, that the same response that is in His heart might be in my heart; therefore the first book of Psalms closes with this verse: “And as for me, Thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me before Thy face tor ever” (Ps 41: 12).  One Man is before God 's face for ever, and the way out of the confusion is by Him.

  But, you may say (and if so, one thanks God for it), I am travelling along the road of finding out what I am; for me it is “O, wretched man that I am!” - “When I would do good, evil is present with me” (Romans 7: 21, 24); how to perform that which I love I know not.  It is selfconsciousness.  I, I, I, twenty-seven times in the chapter.  I have been along that way; I feel for you greatly.  How to perform that which I loved I did not know.  Nothing causes greater anguish than not to be able to do what you love.  People have said to me, You can do as you like.  Yes, I say, I have a new like and I can do it; there was a time when I could not do what I liked.  I loved what God loved, but how to do it I did not know.  I changed the “I” to “Who”, and I got out of the confusion.  I reached that Man who is before God's face for ever, and I was taught this lesson that all I wanted to be was in Him, and He would reproduce Himself in me in the power of the Spirit.  “Who shall deliver me from the body of this death”.  “I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord”.  He embraces Christ; he is married to Another to bring forth fruit to God; he has reached the Man who lives before God’s face for ever.  The way out of the confusion is that I am kept under His influence.  The Spirit of God has been given to us from Him to link us with Him and to keep us under His influence.

  Commencing the 2nd Book of Psalms, you read: “Why art thou cast down, O my soul?” (Psalm 42: 5).  There is confusion.  “God is not the Author of confusion” (1 Cor 14: 33); “Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted in me? hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise Him for the help of His countenance” (Ps 42: 5).  There is a little rift in the cloud - streams of sunlight coming down; but it is not Christianity.  In Psalm 14 it says: “My heart is inditing a good matter: I speak of the things which I have made touching the king: my tongue is the pen of a ready writer; Thou art fairer than the children of men”; far fairer.  The Man who lives before God's face for ever is reached by the soul.  He eclipses everybody.  When Christ ceases to be attractive to you, you are in confusion.  When Christ is attractive to you, you are out of confusion.  Christ is your true self.  I have found perfection, not in myself but in Him, and I have liberty to regard that blessed One as my true self - married to Another to bring forth fruit to God.

  I am come into the will of God because I am kept under the influence of Christ.  As you are kept under His influence, you are out of the confusion.  He has a right to influence me because He took my sins.  I can understand that I shall not go to hell because He bore my sins, but He did it that I might come under His influence.  People often miss the great point of Isaiah 53 (N.T.) verse 11: “instruct many in righteousness”.  It is this, He took your sins that He might instruct you in righteousness.  In New Testament language it is: “Who His own self bare our sins in His own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness” (1 Peter 2: 24).  He bore my sins to make me a righteous person.  He will have a generation of righteous people for His pleasure.  “The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in His hand” (Isa 53: 10).

  In the 72nd Psalm another thing comes into view, and that is the light of another world.  The passage I have read in the 41st Psalm closes the first book of Psalms; it closes with a doxology.  Psalm 72 is the close of the 2nd book.  As you read it, you must say, Well, the confusion is ended now.  The world to come is in that Psalm, and in the world to come all the confusion is ended: because everybody down here will be influenced by Christ.  The confusion is here now; nations are against nations, everything is rising up, and man glories in his selfishness.  The will of one nation is against the will of another.  But it is ended in this Psalm; Christ has got His place, and all men and all things are under the influence of Christ.  “The bread that I will give is My flesh, which I will give for the life of the world” (John 6: 51).  What a beautiful thing it would be, supposing the king of this country, whose position is given of God and whose authority we respect, could say (as he could not for a moment), I could wish that every subject of mine could answer to what I am.  If he governed all by his moral influence, not by might, would not that be grand?  That would be real governing, indeed! - that he could influence his subjects throughout the country by reproducing himself in them.

  What you get here is that all are under the blessed influence of Christ, and the confusion is over.  The Psalm says: “Blessed be His glorious name for ever....  Amen and amen”.  “Let the whole earth be filled with His glory”, not man's glory.  All the confusion down here is through man's glory; but when the whole earth is filled with His glory, the confusion is ended.  “The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended” (Psalm 72: 20).  He has nothing more to pray for; he has reached Him - he has reached perfection.  God told him, “He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God” (2 Samuel 23: 3).  He appreciated it very much, but he broke down.  “Although my house be not so with God; yet He hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure” (2 Samuel 23: 5).
  It is a very remarkable thing that the next Psalm, which begins the third book of Psalms, begins with great confusion.  Here is a man in great confusion.  “When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me” (Ps 73: 16).  Everything is crooked down here.  If you are going to judge God by circumstances, you will be in absolute confusion; you cannot do it.  “When I thought to know this it was too painful for me: until I went into the sanctuary of God; then understood I their end”, Ps 73: 16, 17.  God drew him into His presence.  When God draws us into His presence we have got the light of another world.  We are out of the confusion and darkness of this world; we are in the light of the presence of God, and the confusion is ended.  The grandeur of Christianity lies in two things:- I get the light of life in the Man who lives before God's face for ever, and I get the light of another world to which I belong.  He said, “I went into the sanctuary of God”.  That is your proper place to live; to live in the light of another Man, and of another world of which that blessed Man is the Centre.  When he got back into the sanctuary,·then he understood.  “So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee” (verse 22).  A beast looks around.  If you do that you will get into confusion; you must not judge God by circumstances.  Keep in the sanctuary of His blessed presence, and you will get the light of that other world of the 72nd Psalm.

  In 2 Cor 4: 16, 17, 18, we have a man who lived in the light of another world.  You say, was he not in this world?  He was, and he had a good share of the troubles and trials of this world; but he says, “though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day”.  Listen to him: “Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory”.  He was rejuvenated, made younger.  What was the secret of it?  “while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal”.  Christ is the Centre of that.  May I look that way?  Beloved friends, the things that whiten our heads and furrow our brows and bow us down, are the things that are seen; what will rejuvenate us are the things which are not seen.  The proposal is that you shall get younger every year, be rejuvenated every day, while you look at the things which are not seen.  If you are looking at anything here, it will die.  Christianity puts me in positive possession of that which is outside the reach of death.  I have got a Person outside the reach of death, and I have got a prospect.  The death shadow lies on me and mine here, but I cannot lose Christ.  Ask yourself the question - What do I possess outside the reach of death? Where must you look? You must go into the sanctuary to find it - into the presence of God.  You may look around on those who are dear to you; they are not outside the reach of death, neither are you.  In one sense you are: death does not overwhelm a Christian according to God because death is our servant, death is ours.

  That is what I wanted to shew you.  He went into the sanctuary of God.  “Then understood I their end” - those were the people he envied; now he begins to pity them.  Oh, he says, it is terrible; “Thou castedst them down into destruction” (verse 18); “Thou didst set them in slippery places … How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment”.  Verse 20 is one of the most solemn verses of the Bible: “As a dream when one awaketh: so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt despise their image”.  In regard to active interference, God is asleep; God is not actively interfering with things down here now.  God is awake in resurrection.  The day will come when God will say, Whose image and superscription is this?  If it does not bear the image of Christ, God will despise it.  He will say, is it Christ?  For us it will be His image (Romans 8: 29); but for these people it is very terrible.  What will God say? - You shut Me out of your life, I will shut you out of Mine.  It is eternal banishment from God; He will despise their image.  For us, it goes on to say in 2 Cor 5: 1: “For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens”.  It is the image and superscription of Christ for the Christian.

  In the presence of God you are nothing; it is happy for you when you are nothing.  “I was as a beast before Thee”.  I was foolish, I had these hard thoughts of Thee.  “Nevertheless I am continually with Thee: Thou hast holden me by my right hand” (verse 23).  When he was thinking these hard thoughts of God, God never let him go: He brought him back to the sanctuary.  That is restoring grace.  Now his heart begins to expand.  “Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee; my flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever” (verses 25 and 26).  “Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory” (v 24).  In the sanctuary there was the assurance of it.  The way out of confusion is to keep in the presence of God.

  There are two things in the sanctuary: new conditions of life, and the light of another world.  God revealed and God responded to in the life of another Man, and the light of another world seen in Christ: for He is the centre of that world which God will bring in directly, a new order of things entirely, where we shall be out of confusion.

_________________
  From an un-dated leaflet
  
“BLESSED ARE THEY THAT DWELL IN THY HOUSE” 
Psalm 84; Hebrews 10: 19-25.
  I have read this Psalm, beloved friends, because I think I can see in it the miniature of the Epistle to the Hebrews; that is, the idea of the whole of Hebrews is presented in miniature in the 84th Psalm.  It is divided by that little word “Selah” into three parts.  You have in the first part of the Psalm the blessedness of the dwelling-place, “How amiable are thy tabernacles”, and the soul longing for the presence of God.  Then the sparrows and swallows find a dwelling-place there in the immediate presence of God; and the happiness of those who dwell in the presence of God would be marked by praise.

  Then the Psalm begins again: “Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee; in whose heart are the ways of them”.  Now you get another idea, not only the blessedness of the dwelling-place, but of the man who was on his way to it.  “Who passing through the valley of Baca, make it a well; the rain also filleth the pools”.  Christians are regarded in two lights in Hebrews.  They are on their way to the rest of God, to the everlasting dwelling-place, and they have access to God now.  That man is accounted happy in whose heart is the way of that place: his heart abounds with hope.  But, then, if the way to that place is in his heart, he passes through the valley of weeping.  You have to go through this wilderness, but if you have to go through the valley of Baca, everything in that valley shall be an occasion for you to learn the grace and sympathy of the heart of Christ.  Everything that is untoward and discomforting, which we shrink from naturally, is turned to good account.  It will be an occasion for us to find very great spiritual gain.  It is a great thing to look up for spiritual gain when passing through the valley of Baca.  We have weeping, sorrow, anguish down here; we cannot escape it; but these are occasions in which we may learn what God is, and the grace and sympathy of Christ.  It is painful to be scooped out, but the rain will come down from heaven and fill the pools; you will be blessed spiritually in the valley of Baca, and you will also go from strength to strength because Christ in His priesthood will support you down here.

  Then further, “Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of Thine Anointed”.  Here you have the Person of Christ.  In Hebrews it begins with the glory of His Person, and works backwards, because when 
you begin to read Hebrews it is the grandeur, the greatness of the Person of Christ.  God has Christ before Him, beloved Christians; He will never take His eye off Him, nor His hand off you - never for one moment.  “Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of Thine Anointed”.  All God's thoughts for you are presented in that Person who lives before His face.  Happy for you if you look in the direction in which God is looking! 

  “The Lord will give grace and glory''; that is, the grace and glory are measured by Christ.  His present grace to you and the future glory are measured by that Person on whom He looks, and He will never take His eye off Him.  We shall never find any satisfaction in what we have been or what we are; we cherish the thought that some day or other we shall reach satisfaction in that, but it never shall be.  You have to find your satisfaction in what Christ is.  David had to say, “Although my house be not so with God, yet He hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although He make it not to grow”.  God
’s resource is Christ, and He will never take His eye off Him.  He is acting towards us only on the ground of what Christ is, and He will never act in any other way.  It is a very great thing to get hold of that, because there is the hankering thought and desire to find some satisfaction in the work of God in us.  There is no pleasure in that, but there is in what Christ is before God.  

  The last part of the 84th Psalm is the Person of Christ in whom everything is secured.  Then comes the dwelling-place.  My point in Hebrews is to shew that the privilege of the present time is the immediate presence of God.  I would impress the thought upon you, but if the Spirit impresses it upon you it will do you good.  I want you to get hold of this - 
distance is unbearable to God.  God's great thought and desire is to have man near to Him, and He cannot bear distance.  He had to drive man out of the garden, but that was the just government of God.  How could fallen man stay there?  But if He had to drive Him out, His thought was to give him something better.  We have forfeited our life here, we have lost our title to live down here, but God proposes something better for us, and not only so, but that we should enjoy it in spirit now, that we should be near to God.  In Matthew's Gospel Christ cried that exceeding great and bitter cry, “My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me”?  It was the cry of man at a distance from God.  The Man who always pleased God was found there in the distant spot that you and I should be in nearness to 
God.  He travelled out into the distance.  His love took Him there into that dark and distant spot in order that the heart of God might be gratified in having man near to Him.  Therefore the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, and the dead arose out of their graves.  God's thought is that He should come out to man, and that man should come in to Him, that man should find his home in the immediate presence of God.  Is that your idea, beloved friends?  What has Satan succeeded in doing?  When I think of it, it gives me great anguish of spirit.  Satan said, 
‘I will let people have a Christianity that will keep God at a distance, and I will defeat the purpose of God’.  In Christendom God is at a distance.  There is the respectful recognition of God at a distance on occasions.  God does not want that: He wants nearness.  I do hate that which makes distance between people's souls and God, for I know it is distasteful to Him.  It is His own pleasure to have us near Him.  If that thought gets into your heart it will do you good.  He wants us near Him.  Take the well-known Scripture in the book of Exodus.  When the tabernacle was set up the glory of God filled it, and Moses, the man of God, could not stand in the presence of that glory; he was driven out.  The glory of God was too great for him.  Now, dear Christians, that is full of spiritual meaning for us.  God begins to speak to Moses from that spot.  He says, 
‘I want to have you near; although I have driven you out because of what you are, I want to have you near because of what Christ is’.  How is He going to have us back?  He will have us back because of Christ, therefore He speaks of the burnt offering.  You have the acceptance offering first, then you go on to the meat offering, then the peace offering, and then the sin offering.  We begin with the sin offering, but we end with the acceptance offering; but, you see, God begins from His own side.  He says, 
‘I am going to have you back in the acceptance of Christ’.  Well, but what about the sin side of it?  Christ identified Himself with it; He took our sins, nay more, He became what we were that the thing might be judged, so that in the sin offering the Lord Jesus Christ identified Himself with the offender.  I am the person the Lord Jesus identified Himself with; my sins and my sin - not only my sins, but my state.  He was made sin for us, He who knew no sin, and, mind you, He was made subject to the judgment of God.  The sacrifice was subjected to the fire, and all that was left were the ashes, and they were the witness that the judgment was past!  Only for us it is not the ashes, but it is the living Person who died.  We have not the ashes, but we have the Person who was the Victim out from among the 
dead, and He is the witness that that judgment is past for ever, and that all has been removed from under the eye of God that was unsuitable.
  Well, there is another thing.  It is not only that the Lord Jesus was the Victim and identified Himself with my condition; the burnt offering is the other way about.  I am identified with the offering, because all that was agreeable to God was found in Him when the sin was removed; there is not a beauty or perfection in the offering that I am not identified with in the eye of God, and we have boldness to enter into the holiest.  Every disturbing element - everything in you that would be of a disturbing nature - has an absolute and perfect answer in the blood of Jesus.  Not only so, but there is “a new and living way, which He has consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, His flesh”.  In the death of Christ all that was contrary to God has been removed.  How could I be happy with God if I did not know I was accepted?  How could I find pleasure in God's company if I did not know He found pleasure in mine?  These two things are absolutely necessary.  If I am to find pleasure in God's company I must know that I am suitable to Him.  How can I be?  Only through Christ.  Everything that is unsuitable must be removed, but the death of Christ has removed it.  There is no reason that there should be any disturbing element: it has all been met by the blood of Christ.  It is often quoted that “If we walk in the light as He is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all sin”.  That is the meaning of it; I can walk in the light as God is in the light.  Why?  Because the blood of Christ is always there before the eye of God.

  I put a very pertinent question to every one of you.  Are you happy with God?  Are you at home in God's presence?  
‘His presence is our home’.  Is that the proposal that God has for me that I should find my home in His presence?  How can that be?  Through the blood of Jesus; through that new and living way which He 
hath consecrated for us.  Is not Christ suitable to God?  Has not He gone in to God?  Yes, as the One who died to sin once, and lives to God.  Is that my way?  What other way could I go into the presence of God?  His way in is my way in, and His way out is my way out.  It is a very simple thing to say, but it is very profound.  He has been through death; He has died to sin and He lives to God.  That is my way in.  How?  In the life of the Man who lives to God.  There I can enjoy the immediate presence of God, and find my home in that presence.  Beloved Christians, God invites us to come in.  Distance is 
unbearable to God.  What did the Father say in the story of the prodigal?  Oftentimes we hear that parable preached from.  I heard it preached from in the light of my need, I was the poor prodigal.  Thank God I was in need; I was hungry and I turned to God
,  and the time came when I became number two in the parable.  I was hungry, I was in need: I needed forgiveness.  But there was another thing: 
there was the hunger of the Father’s heart for the boy, that is the prominent thing in that parable; the delight of the Father in bringing that boy into His own immediate presence, into a spot he had never known before.  What is the Father saying?  
‘When he comes back I will let him know what the Father is he has turned from’.  He fell on his neck and covered him with kisses, or kissed him much.  That is God's side; I have nothing against you, I am for you, and what was the effect of that kiss?  What did He make the prodigal's heart understand?  
I am glad you are come back to Me.  It made the prodigal feel the Father's heart in having him back, and he says, as it were, 
‘You must do what you will with me now’.  The Father says, “Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet, and bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it
; and let us eat, and be merry”.  The prodigal had proposed to say, “Make me as one of thy hired servants”.  No, if you come back you come to be in sonship, not to be sent into the kitchen; the Father's kisses set that aside.  People may say, that is humility.  If you send me into the kitchen I will behave better.  The Father says, No, I am going to bless you according to what is in My heart.  People will not let God do that.  He says, “Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet”.  What does it mean?  It gives him the consciousness that he is in all the acceptance of Christ.  What does that mean?  That He is to be before Him in holiness and love in order that there might be no distance.  And so the Father does it all, and the climax is reached.  What is it?  The Father finds His pleasure in having that son near Him.  Is that the blessed God?  That is He.  Try and divert the prodigal by talking about his best robe.  No; what will he keep saying?  
‘Oh it is my blessed Father I am thinking of’.  You cannot divert him; that is the point reached.  He is engrossed with the infinite blessedness of his Father.  To put it in other words, he is joying in God.  

  We have such an High Priest.  One who lives there to maintain us.  “Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith”.  I think it is very sad that we do not draw near.  We are too religious: we have come to 
what is simply right.  We are too cold, too formal, and we do not bear the marks of blessed familiarity with God.  May the Lord exercise us as to this.  You may come to a meeting like this and say, 
‘That is lovely’.  But are you going to draw near in full assurance of faith, and that in the sense that it is God's pleasure to have you near?  We often sing - one is frequently checked in singing it 
– ‘His presence is our home’.  
“Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house”.  The worthless bird and the restless bird find a home there in the presence of God.  We, who are by nature worthless and restless, find a shelter in the presence of God, under those altars, the altars of acceptance in the new and living way which He 
hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, His flesh.  It is a very blessed thing to dwell in the presence of God.  What happens when we get there?  We enjoy life, We begin to live to God.  How sad it is that we defer our happiness; we put it off, and dwell too much in nature and in life here, and so little in the immediate presence of God.  The Lord grant that we may be led to pray in secret about it, that we may draw near in full assurance of faith.  Then a new world opens up to you, and you hold fast.  When you draw near you begin to look in the direction in which God is looking, and you see He is looking at Christ, and what is set forth in Christ
, all the fulness of God.
  In the sanctuary you get the light of another world, of which Christ is the Centre.  The apostle speaks of it, and he says “though our outward man perish, yet the inward is renewed day by day.  For our light affliction which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen”.  That is the holiest.  The apostle lived in the light of another world, and he held fast to it.  You learn in the sanctuary what to hold fast to.  Do you not see that what you are in touch with down here must come to an end?  You are down here in natural life, and you can thank God for all the mercies you partake of in this life; but the whole question is whether you see another world where there is no failure or decay.  Everything in this world is marked by decay, but there is not a trace of death in the holiest.  You have passed death, and you have got the sense in your souls that you belong to another scene where no death can be.  I think it is a very poor thing that some have just got the knowledge that Christ died for them, and that they will go to heaven at last.  It should be that you see that you belong to that world, that blessed scene, in which Christ is.  I hold fast to what is eternal, to what binds me 
to that which I cannot see, and I know it is marked by stability and abidingness.  
Christianity proposes to put you in present touch with what abides, with what will not decay, and with what we shall never lose.
  Then there is another thing.  “Let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works”.  What Christianity proposes to do is to put me in affection with other people
.  I go into the holiest, and I learn there what a Christian is, what God's affection is for you.  You are interested in me because God is interested in me, and I am interested in you because God is interested in you.  We go into the holiest to learn that we are of value to Divine Persons.  If you go into the holiest you learn the value of Christian intercourse; you see what the Christian is in the mind of God.  That which is in nature is all right, but the bonds which God has formed in our souls are eternal.  We do not make enough of each other.  Beloved Christians, these divine relationships are more than anything.  How may I provoke you to love and good works?  By loving you.  How can I go on like that?  I must be in the holiest.  I have been in there to learn your value to God, and you have been in to learn my value to God, and I provoke you to love, and you provoke me to love.  And what will happen now?
  
We shall not forsake the assembling of ourselves together.  I cannot understand how people can go and take the Lord’s Supper and never come to a meeting during the week.  I cannot understand a Christian not caring to be with other Christians.  It seems so contrary, because, if you love me and I love you in these blessed bonds, I love being with you.  People often come more readily to hear the Lord’s servants give an address, or ministry, than they will on ordinary occasions.  If you live in the holiest you will live in the light of divine affection for God’s people, and you will be provoking them to love, and you will be glad to assemble with them.  In the early days of the Church the Christians were always glad to be together; they enjoyed those blessed bonds in all their reality, in all their strength.  I pray that these remarks may be helpful, and that your one desire may be to dwell in the presence of God.  It is God's good pleasure to have you there.  
“Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house: they will be still praising Thee”. 
_____________________
  From an un-dated leaflet
  
“LIVING TO GOD”
Romans 6: 1-4; 7: 4-6
  I want to bring before you a simple but a very practical subject.  It is that of living to God.  If you are to live to God, you must know Him.  If people do not know God, they cannot live to Him.  I want to show you that there is no effort in practical Christianity; there is energy and power, but no effort.  There are many people who are trying to live to God, but they do not know Him. If we are Christians, we are the fruit of the gospel.  The great thing in the gospel is this, that God approachcs us, and He says in unmistakable language, I want you to know Me, in order that you may love Me and live to Me.  We think the gospel was preached to us that we might be forgiven and go to heaven when we die. I think that is defective; I quite admit that relief is one element of the gospel, but it is not the main point in it.  I cannot live to God until I have relief 
- I must have a purged conscience.
  My point is that whether I am here or there, I am to live to Him, and that is the true happiness of the creature.  “For thy pleasure they are and were created “ (Rev 4: 11).  It is only living to God that will make you happy, whether it be in this world or in the future.

  The epistle to the Romans is the great book where the gospel is expounded.  It i
s a little remarkable that in our version this epistle comes after the Acts.  In the latter book you see the apostle preaching the gospel, and in Romans it is expounded.  The first thing he shows us in this epistle is our ruin.  Man's con
dition is first brought out in heathendom, then in philosophy, and lastly in Jewish privilege; but he is found wanting.  When you come to the scriptures, God does not flatter you; He tells you the naked truth about yourself.  The books written by men are more or less untruthful.  In scripture God tells me what I am on the one hand, and what HE IS on the other.  He tells us the naked truth about ourselves in order that He may introduce Himself: “Faithful are the wounds of a friend”.

  In chapters 3, 4 and 5 of Romans, God tells us what He is for us, and we must learn this before we can be for Him.  He takes advantage of our ruin, to show all the infmite splendour of what He is.  This is the key to the position.  Many people reverse this.  The point is that you want first to see what God is.  You must be established in what God is for you, as distinct from what you are for Him.  No question is raised about our state 
in Romans until we come to chapter 6, and the point there is what we can be for God.  I see that God presents Himself in five different aspects in the chapters to which I have alluded; that is as seen in goodness, grace, righteousness, power, and love.  And that blessed God is for us.  In chapter 3 we have the righteous platform on which God approaches man through the blood of Christ.   At the end of chapter 4, and in chapter 5, we have the righteous platform on to which He brings us in a risen Christ .   We are in the presence of the God of resurrection, the God who raised up Jesus our Lord.  The gospel is morally grand, its backbone is the righteousness of God.  You would naturally think that in the exposition of the gospel, the first thing to be brought forward would be the 
love of God; no, the scripture says, “Therein is the righteousness of God revealed”.   It  is God
’s consistency with Himself.  Therefore no moral charge can be brought against Him.  As I said, chapter 3 is morally greater than chapter 4.   It  is when we believe in Him who raised up Jesus our Lord, that we make our start as Christians.  No person can get peace till he knows he is approved of God.  If you have not come on to that platform, you cannot face out the question of living to God.  If you are there then you can live to Him, having every question settled.  God shows 
us what He is to us, before we ca n see what we can be to Him.  Christ is the measure of all that God will be to you. In chapter 5 it is all  “by” and “through” Him.  Therefore it is a wealthy chapter, and the Spirit of God continually uses the words “much more”.  Until we get to chapter 5 nothing is said about what we can be for God, but only what He is for us.  My point is that you must know God before you can live to Him.

  In chapter 6 the apostle meets a natural thought, “Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?” - God forbid.  This raises the question how we are to live to God.  The position which the Christian takes is to be dead to sin; this is the moral force of baptism .  You may quarrel about baptism; the enemy does not care about that, if he can keep you from the moral force of what it means.  The point here is to show you the moral force of the thing.   There is great spiritual meaning in  baptism and the Lord's supper.  Baptism signifies this, that you are baptised unto Jesus Christ, that you should accept His death and walk in a new kind of life.  To put it in a simple way, it means that you have no right to a will down here.  Permit an illustration  the moment a man takes the king’s shilling he becomes a soldier.  He is no longer an agriculturist, but, though a raw recruit, he is in reality a soldier.  In baptism you change your position; 
you pass professedly from one platform to another, in order that you may live to God.
  The other part of baptism is that I am to die by man’s will.  It may seem to be a hard saying, but it is perfectly certain, that I have no right to a will.  And, indeed, I have no right to anything in this world.  Baptism means martyrdom.  You may say we are not in the presence of that kind of thing now.  No, because the world has adopted Christianity as a religion.  Satan could not succeed in crushing it, but he corrupted it when he got an Emperor to adopt Christianity.  You may depend upon it that Christianity is a suffering thing.  I am not to look for favours here.  If you are doing so, how do you understand this, “For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter”?  But we are told that such people cannot be separated from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.  Baptism put them publicly in the position to be slaughtered, but nothing could separate them from the love of God.  You cannot measure God’s love by earthly benefits.  He numbers the hairs of my head, and He takes care of me, but His love is seen in another way altogether.  Scripture distinguishes things which differ; but mark, the love of God is in Christ Jesus our Lord.  You do not speak of His love in connection with mercies here.

  If you recognise Christianity as a suffering thing, you will be compensated; you will have the gain of the Lord's company and of holy intimacy with Him.  You get compensation down here, and you come under the influ
ence of Christ; you come to Him in the same way as Peter when he left the boat to go to Jesus.  
He saw the Lord walking on the water, and he said, as it were, There is no one in the boat I love like You, and the Lord invites him to come.  Peter steps out, and what makes him do it is affect.ion for Christ.  How does he walk on the water? 
 He is not thinking of himself, but his eye is on Christ.
  I want to show you that you must be married to Another in order to bear fruit to God.  The journey of' the soul begins in Romans 7: 7.  You try to please Christ, but you find out you cannot do so.  You have tried, and find there is no good in you; you have no power in yourself.  I once started to be, as I thought, a splendid Christian - I said, ‘I do not belong to the world’, but I soon found out that there was something in me which would not go that way at all.  I said, ‘If I cannot live to God, what is the good of living at all’. Then I discovered that it was I who wanted to be a 
good Christian.  The Lord said to me, ‘Poor creature, draw near to Me now, and learn in Me all the goodness and all the power, and I will love you into accepting My death’. That is practical Christianity.  The Lord said to me, ‘You shall die in My death, under the power of My love’.  Love for Christ is the mighty lever in Christianity.  If your heart is true to His love, you will be true to that in which it was expressed, and that is His death.  The apostle says, “The love of Christ constraineth us”.  People pray that His love may constrain the preacher; but that is not the meaning of it, it is the love of Christ constraineth ME.  His love will not pass over my failings in a sentimental way.  The man in the seventh chapter of Romans is a converted man who does not know much, if anything, of the love of Christ.  The Christian loves what God loves, though he may not nave peace.  After the inward man he loves what is suitable to God, but the law comes to him and says, “Thou shalt not covet”.  To covet is to lust.  It is not a question of outward action only, but of inward feeling.  Lust is that you desire to have something which God does not want you to have.  God proposes to deliver me from all this - “The water that I shall give him
 shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life”.
  The man in the seventh of Romans goes through a great inward struggle.  Many people pass through the same experience after their conversion.  The difftculty is in learning to distinguish between myself and sin that dwells in me.  The soul says in effect, I do not know how to do that which I love to do.

  This man needs to learn what it is to be married to Another.  He is going along the road where he learns himself.  If you want to see the stars by daylight, you must go to the bottom of a deep well.  It is only in the depths of the deep well of humilia
tion and self-judgment that we can learn the infinite blessedness and competency of Christ to lift you up. This question is a momentous one, for all your happmess depends upon it.  Cease your struggling and sit down in the presence of His perfection.  He says to you, Look at Me and enjoy Me.  Think no longer of yourself, but be occupied with Him, and thus you will exchange the misery of self-consciousness for the joy of Christconsciousness.

  The same wonderful Person who is the source of life is the object of life.  We are called to look at the perfect expression of life which we se
e in Him.  The Spirit of God has been pleased to take up the figure of 
marriage in this seventh chapter of our epistle.  He does this when writing to the Gentile because they would understand it.  The wife should be what a man makes her.  If a husband says he has a bad wife,  he proclaims his own shame.  Let us suppose the case of a perfect husband; the wife says to him, I feel my imperfections. He replies, never mind, come under my influence, and I will teach you.  We come under the influence of Christ, because we love Him and admire His perfections.  You can never love Him until you enjoy Him and can say, ‘with adoring fervour in this Thy nature grow’.  Some dear Christians cannot abandon themselves for Christ; you have a title to disown yourself for Christ.  The old man is what I am according to the flesh.  Now I am no longer linked with that, but I have gone over to Christ; He is my Lord.  Death has severed  
the link between the old man and myself; Christ, by the Spirit, has made the tie: I am married to Him.  You must know that you are a Christian before you can act like one, and for this it is necessary to know Christ as your Lord and Head.

  Peter walking on the water is an illustration of Romans 8: 2, “The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death”.  The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus is to love God; the law of sin and death is to love myself.  What I desire to show you is what all this means in a practical way.  The first action of the love of God in a Christian is to cause him to love God; you live to Him in holy love.  That is what the Lord did in perfection as a Man when down here.  That is the law of the life which I have been brought into; it will set me free from the law of self-love.  Do you think any one will offend you if you are in the enjoyment of His love.  If you are in the love of God, you are not thinking of yourself; you are small in your own eyes, and therefore you are safe.  If you have before your soul the blessedness of what God is, you will desire to live to such a God as He.  The great point is that He has not only relieved me of the burden of my sins, but He desires that I should KNOW HIM, THAT I MAY LOVE HIM AND L
IVE TO HIM FOR EVER.
____________________
  From an un-dated leaflet



‘RUBBING IT OUT BIT BY BIT’
  It was a lovely and secluded spot, the village of B-- ; and as I walked round its churchyard, one bright summer day, it seemed too lovely for death to be there.  Nevertheless, on every hand there were the unmistakeable signs of it - freshly  inscribed tombstone
s, as well as those of two or three centuries, which time had well-nigh effaced, making it extremely difficult to decipher the long-forgotten name.  How brief is man
’s day!  His history summed up by the wise man, 
‘Come’, ‘Gone’, ‘Forgotten’, soon forgotten by man, and yet not forgotten by God, each name, each history, and all to come up again in the hour that is nearing apace.  
“Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice”.  How blessed to have heard His word, His voice, in the hour that 
“now is”.  To such it will be a resurrection of life.  To those who have never heard His voice in that hour, it will be a resurrection of judgment.  

  Musing thus, I stood under the shade of a tall chestnut tree, whose branches reached out over the churchyard gate, and wellnigh across the road.  Under the tree by the roadside was a huge stone.  On it I observed sitting an old man, whose grey locks betokened many summers and winters.  He seemed to be enjoying the rest and shade; and as there was room for another, I went and sat with him.  

  I said, ‘Father, you seem to be getting on in years’. 
  ‘Yes, sir, I am well-nigh eighty-two’. 
  ‘I suppose you have spent most of your time in this village?’
  ‘I was born, brought up, and have lived most of my life here.  
I don’t think I have been a fortnight out of it’. 
  I said, ‘You have seen many changes in your lifetime.  Most of the people you knew in youthful days are gone
’. 
  ‘Ah, yes!’ he said, shaking his head and looking towards the churchyard gate.
  I said, ‘They will soon he taking you in there’. 
  ‘Yes, I can’t expect to be here much longer’. 
  ‘Have you any hope beyond?’ I said.
  He replied, ‘I think I have’. 
  ‘What about your sins?  They must be got rid of.
  
It is written “There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie”’.
  He replied, ‘I am getting on, sir, - saying my prayers, reading my Bible, I think I am getting on, sir, rubbing them out bit by bit’. 
  ‘Oh’, I said. ‘You will never get rid of your sins that way!  All your prayer saying, your Scripture reading, would never blot out a single sin-stain.  No, father (pointing up) there is One blessed Man, the Son of Cod, who when he had made by Himself made purification of sins, sat down on the right hand of God, of whom God declares in His word, that His blood, and His blood alone, can cleanse sins; and you, as you sit here, looking up and trusting Him, may know, on the authority of God’s word, at this very moment, that all your sins are gone, and gone for ever
’.
  ‘It is not thy tears of repentance or prayers.
     But the blood that atones for the soul.’
  Reader, hast thou known its cleansing virtue?  It cleanseth 
now; it cleanseth from all sin.  What an awful delusion, 
‘Rubbing them out bit by bit’.  And yet how many there are who, if not using the simple language of this countryman, are seeking some other way than God's way of cleansing.

  Without the shedding of blood there is no remission of sins.
  “The blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all sin.”
WHY DO PEOPLE DIE?
  You will have to die some day, but why?  It is not natural to die, it is natural to sleep.  You don’t go upstairs to die in the same way that you go upstairs to sleep.  You have stood by your dying friends, perhaps, and you have seen that it is not natural to die.

DEATH COMES THROUGH SIN.
  “The wages of sin is death”.  The reason people die is because they are 
not fit to live here.  You know not but that you may die to-night.  Perhaps you hope to go to heaven when you die.  I am not speaking of Christians now (as a matter of fact some Christians will not die at all), I am speaking  to those who are unconverted.  You hope to go to heaven, yet you die 
because you are not fit for earth!  Hope to get to heaven, do you?  What a strange thing!  How can you think of going to heaven to live with God, when you are not fit to live on earth with men?  I am not shutting the door of heaven against you, but I want you to see how matters really stand with you.  It is a solemn subject.  God may stop the beating of your heart to-night.  If you leave this world as not fit to live here, do you think you are going to live with God on the same footing - your own merit?
  
Certainly not.
___________________
  From ‘Salvation of God’, 1888
  
“BE SURE YOUR SIN WILL FIND YOU OUT”
(Numbers 32: 23)
  Some years since I stood in a picture-gallery before a masterpiece, which made a deep impression on me, and which serves as an illustration of the above passage of scripture. The title of the picture was, ‘The Dismal Swamp’.  In the foreground was a negro, a runaway slave, panting for breath, and entangled by the reeds; pursuing, and close behind him, were the fierce bloodhounds, with terrible fangs and frothy mouths.  It was evident he could feel the hot breath of those terrible creatures close at his heels; for in his eyes there was depicted such a look of hopeless despair as I have never forgotten.  I have seen such a look once in my life since, at a scene more real and terrible.  I was standing by the deathbed of a man who had rejected the gospel of the grace of God. I had been repeating that beautiful scripture, “It is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners”.  He seemed unconscious as I kept repeating it close to his dying ear, when, gathering up his strength, he rose up in the bed  with just such a look of dark despair, he wailed so hopelessly, 
‘The Lord Jesus will have nothing to do with me now, and I can have nothing to do with Him. To-night, to-night my soul will be in hell’, and that night he died.  Oh, my reader, may you never know such a death-bed as that! 

  Rouse, I beseech you, ere the “evil day” come upon you, the day you gladly forget, the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, when the silver cord shall be loosed, the golden bowl broken, the pitcher broken at the fountain, when the dust shall return to the earth as it was, and the spirit unto God who gave it! And it may come in one fell moment, and then, oh, then, you will pass into eternity to await the resurrection, when, like the negro in the picture, discovered and overtaken, in that terrible judgment-day you will find out the truth of the scripture, “Be sure your sin will find you out”; and yet another scripture, “Some men’s sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment; and some men they follow after”. Yes, my reader, those secret sins, hidden and unknown to your fellow-men, but known to God, are on your track, and will face you there if not here. How blessed to be discovered now!  “I acknowledged my sin unto Thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid.  I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord
; and Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin”. 
  Mark the words “I acknowledged” and “Thou forgavest”.  Yes, there is forgiveness now for thee, dear reader; but how? through that blessed Man in heaven, the Lord Jesus Christ, who was once on the tree, the sinless One who said, “Mine iniquities have taken hold upon Me, so that I am not able to look up; they are more than the hairs of mine head”; of whom the Scripture says concerning all who trust Him, “Who His own self bare our sins in His own body on the tree”.  Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures. He was buried and rose again according to the Scriptures.

  “Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this Man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: and by Him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses”. 
_____________________
  From ‘Salvation of God’, 1888
  
THE SQUIRE’S WAY TO HEAVEN
  Dusty and tired, after walking across a remote country district, I had reached the beautiful village of C--, from whence I purposed going by rail to the neighbouring town of A-- to preach that night.  Being a stranger, and not knowing the way, I was looking about for someone to direct me when I observed a tall, stately-looking old gentleman sauntering along the road.  Overtaking him, I asked if he would kindly show me the way to the station.  He politely said, 
‘I am going in that direction, and if you accompany me I will direct you’.  So we walked and chatted together, when at length he said, 
‘I will show you something near the station here that you will not see every day in this kingdom - a place where five roads meet’. 
  ‘Indeed,’ I said, ‘some people tell us there are many roads to heaven.  May I ask, sir, what would be your way to heaven?
’
  He stopped, drew himself up very proudly, and, looking me straight in the face, said, ‘My way to heaven, sir, is to do my duty’. 
  I said, ‘Listen! “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself”, Luke 10: 27.  Have you done this?
’
  After a pause, with his eyes fixed on the ground, he replied, ‘Well, I cannot say I have’.  

  ‘No’, I said, ‘you have broken down on that road; but there is a blessed Man up there in heaven, Jesus, the Son of God, who loved God with all His heart, and who, when here, looking upon the sons of men, said, “I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you”, John 5: 42; and of Himself could say, “I do always those things that please him”, John 8: 29; who went to the cross and laid down His pure and spotless life for such wretched neighbours as you and me.  Ah!  He loved His neighbours better than Himself, and died to bring us to God, and to give us a title to glory.  So He could say: “I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved”, John 10: 9; “I am the way ... no man cometh unto the Father, but by me”
.’ John 14: 6. 
  Now, dear reader, I would ask you the same question, Which is your way to heaven?  It would be an awful thing to make a mistake, as many are doing, alas! who are building their hopes on a path of rectitude, or, in 
the words of the squire, upon doing their duty.  There is a way that 
seemeth to be right unto men, but the end of that way is death (Prov 14: 12).  Listen to God’s word: “Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight”, Rom 3: 20; “For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them”, Gal  3: 10.  The law tells me what I ought to be, and curses me if I am not it.  The gospel tells me what God is, and blesses me if I believe it.  The law 
demands love  “Thou shalt love”, Deut 6: 5.  The gospel 
produces it - “We love him, because he first loved us”, 1 John 4: 19.  “Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins”, 1 John 4: 10.

  You cannot read Scripture without being struck with the fact that it is a wonderful thing to be a Christian.  There is a beautiful word which explains it: “We know”.  There is a fine ring about that word "know”.  We 
know; it is not, We hope.  What does the Christian know? 
 The apostle, looking at the possibility of death, says, “We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God”, 2 Cor 5: 1.  He is not dismayed at the thought of death; he is not afraid; he speaks with confidence about it.  What fills a man’s heart with fear is the thought of death, the “evil day”, the day of departure from this world.  The poor Christless soul cannot face it, but here is a man who views it without fear, yea, with pleasure.  He says in another chapter, “We look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen”, 2 Cor  4: 18.  The difference between a converted and an unconverted man is, that the unconverted man is guided by what is seen, whilst the converted man is guided by what is not seen.  A man who looks ahead in this world is praised because he is thought to be prudent.  But he does not look ahead far enough.  The apostle looks ahead into eternity, and for him it is all gladsome.  Christians have bright prospects there.  Have you?  When a Christian thinks of eternity he thinks of that dearest word to an Englishman -  
Home!  I understand that you cannot find a word exactly like it in any other language.  It is very expressive.

  When I was a sailor I remember well the feeling I had as we weighed anchor for home.  The ship loaded, all ready, the command given!  We are homeward bound!  A thrill of delight passes through the whole ship.  But 
‘home’ has a sweeter thought for me now.  I am going to spend 
eternity in the Father’s house.  That is home for the Christian.  Nearer home!  What a prospect!

  Oh! poor, unsaved sinner, dark is thy prospect!  “He that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him”, John 3: 36.

  The preacher sees out yonder a dark, dark cloud: you see none; but he entreats you to wake up to this important matter.
  May you, my reader, be able to say, I have known and believed the love that God hath towards me.
____________________
Jesus said:
  “I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me”.       
      
      
      
      
      
John 14: 6
  “Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out”.       
John 6: 37
____________________
  From ‘Tidings of Life and Peace’, 1889
  
‘ALL CLEAR FROM THERE TO HERE’
  It was our privilege some years ago to pitch a gospel tent in the village of E--. Many came to hear, and, thank God, some for blessing.  Among others was an old man, T. N., who 
had been a marine in Her Majesty's service, now retired on his pension, to spend the remainder of his days in his native village.  God was pleased to reach him at one of the earliest meetings.  The sharp, barbed arrow of conviction entered his soul; those long years of sin rose up before him with all their consequences.  He faced his past with God, and it troubled him sore.

  We visited him at his cottage many a time, and presented the blessed gospel to him.  Still no peace.  Often at the close of our interviews would he say with his deep voice, 
‘But God is just, sir - God is just’.  He had yet to learn that if God be just, He is “the justifier of 
him which believeth in Jesus”.
  Weeks rolled by, and others were brought into blessing, but T. N.'s trouble deepened.  The last Sunday came, and on Monday morning the canvas was coming down. It was a solemn time this last Preaching.  The subject was: “When once the Master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us”, etc. (Luke 13: 25). T. N. sat just inside the tent door, with a look which seemed to say, 
‘If I do not get the blessing tonight, whenever shall I get it?’
  At the close of the meeting we invited the people to stay for prayer.  To our surprise T. N. was the first to leave.  He went home to have the after-meeting with God.  On Monday morning, walking down the village,  I met him.  As he drew near, his face told the tale of this after-meeting.  Holding up his hand, with a look of peace and joy on his face, he said, 
‘It is all right with me now’.  
‘Tell me’, I said, ‘how it happened’.  He said, 
‘Last night I went home to my cottage, fell on the floor, and cried for mercy. I said, as the sweat poured off me ‘O God, have mercy on a poor old sinner like me’.  At last I saw the Lord Jesus on the cross for a poor old sinner like me; then I saw Him in the glory, and it is all clear from there
’ - pointing upward - ‘to here’ - smiting on his breast.  
All clear from there to here.  
It was peace.
  How is it with you, dear reader?  Have you acknowledged the claims of the throne?  Do  you know the One who has met those claims?  How 
blessed to know that the God to whom we are responsible, and who alone could rightly estimate the extent of our responsibility, has come in from His own side to meet it?  
His love provided what His holiness demanded; His own blessed Son was that provision.  A Divine Person was competent to give divine satisfaction. 

  “Wherefore, when He cometh into the world, He saith, Sacrifice and offering Thou wouldest not, but a body hast Thou prepared Me ... Lo, I come (in the volume of the Book it is written of Me,) to do Thy will, O God" (Heb. 10: 5, 7).  
He has done it, “But this Man, after He had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down at the right hand of God” (v 12).  

  He is where He is because He did what He did where He was; and He did what He did where He was because of who He is - THE SON OF GOD. 
  God the Holy Ghost has now come down to bear witness to us of what is in the mind of God for us. He is a competent witness.  Listen, then, to His witness: “
Their sins and your iniquities will I remember no more”. No more! NO MORE! NO MORE!  It is like the olive leaf which the dove brought to Noah. The dove brought the witness that 
the judgment was past, and it plainly said, No more! no more!
  The Son of God has gone up the shining way to the throne of God, and the Spirit of God has come down to let us know ‘it is all clear from there to here’. 
_____________________
  From ‘Tidings of Light and Peace’, 1903
  
“VANITY OF VANITIES”
  “Vanity of vanities”, saith the Preacher at the beginning and end of Ecclesiastes, which has been well described as the wail of a dissatisfied heart.  All “under the sun” has been tried and found wanting, and what a cloud of witnesses history gives only repeating the cry of the Preacher,

  “Vanity of vanities; all is vanity”. 
  The incident of Cardinal Mazarin's farewell to his pictures is told in the memoirs of Louis Henri Comte de Brienne, who says, ‘I was walking some days after in the new apartments of his palace.  I recognised the approach of the Cardinal (Mazarin) by the sound of his slippered feet, which he dragged one after the other, as a man enfeebled by a mortal malady.  I concealed myself behind the tapestry, and I heard him say, ‘
Il faut quitter tout cela’ (I must leave all that).  He stopped at every step, for he was very feeble; and casting his eye on each object that attracted him, he sighed forth as from the bottom of his heart, ‘I must leave all’; What pains I have taken to acquire all these things’.  ‘Can I leave them without regret?’.  ‘I shall never see them more where I am about to go’.
’
  “Vanity of vanities; all is vanity”.
  Lord Chesterfield, the man of letters and leader of the fashionable world, a short time before his death, wrote a letter, in which he says, ‘I have run the silly round of business and pleasure, and have done with them all.  I have enjoyed all the pleasures of the world, and consequently know their futility, and do not regret their loss.  I appraise them at their real value
, which, in truth, is very low.  W
hereas those who have not experience always overrate them.  They only see their gay outside, and are dazzled with the glare
.  B
ut I have seen behind the scenes.  I have seen all the coarse pulleys and dirty ropes which exhibit and move the gaudy machine
; and  I have seen and smelled the tallow candles which illuminate the whole decoration, to the astonishment and admiration of an ignorant audience.  When I reflect on what I have seen, what I have heard, and what I have done, I can hardly persuade myself that all that frivolous hurry and bustle and pleasure of the world had any reality; but I look on all that is passed
, as one of the romantic dreams that opium commonly occasions; and I do by no means desire to repeat the nauseous dose for the sake of the fugitive dream’.
  “Vanity of vanities; all is vanity”. 
  Lord Byron, the brilliant poet (who said, ‘I woke up one morning to find myself famous’), joins in the strain when he says -
Count o’er the joys thy hours have seen, 
     Count o’er thy days from anguish free.  

And know, whatever thou hast been
     ’Tis something better not to be.
  And the verses, which are said to be the last which came from his pen, tell their own tale of a misspent life, and the terrible wakening to a want so long ago described: “And when he had spent all … he began to be in want”.
     My days are in the yellow leaf,
     The flowers, the fruits of love are gone, 
     The worm, the canker, and the grief
     Are mine alone!
     The fire that on my bosom preys
     ls lone as some volcanic isle;
     No torch is lighted at its blaze -
     A funeral pile.”
“Vanity of vanities; all is vanity”. 
  The politician, philosopher, poet, and thousands more, join in the “Preacher’s” cry.  It must be so, for we are all heirs to two great necessities - a 
guilty conscience and a dissatisfied heart.  Sad fruits of departure from God.  But God  proposes in the gospel to meet both.  The work of Christ for the conscience and the gift of Christ for the heart.

  Listen to words which fell from His lips upon the ears of a poor weary Samaritan woman at Sychar's well.  “Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again: but whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing  up into everlasting life”, John 4: 13, 14.

  Again, “In the last day, that  great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me,
 and drink.  
He that  believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water”, John 7: 37, 38.

  What a wonderful proposal!  Surely the blessed Son of God would not tantalise us with magnificent impossibilities.

  Dear reader, have you come to Christ, the Christ who died to meet your need in connection with your sins, and who lives to give you this marvellous gift which shall put you in touch with Him who is outside the reach of death above the sun?
  It was in the sense of this that Paul, when before King Agrippa, could say, “I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds”, Acts 26: 29.  What a contrast to poor Byron's 
‘’Twere something better not to be’!
  True happiness lies in the knowledge of God, for He alone is great enough for our hearts, and in the gospel, by His blessed Son, God is saying, I want you to know Me in order that you may love Me and live to Me.
  This is what Christ proposes in the gift of living water, to shed abroad the love of God in our heart by the Holy Spirit.  

  Oh! how blessed to know that nothing is “able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord”.
  What a contrast to poor Cardinal Mazarin’s ‘I must leave all that, I shall never see them more where I am about to go!’
  My reader, allow me to put a question to you at the close.  
What do you possess outside the reach of death?
____________________
  From ‘Tidings of Light and Peace’, 1903
  
  

MUCH FRUIT
  “Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit.” - John 15: 8
  What a possibility, what an inspiration, that we can enhance the glory of the Father!  Our hearts leap at the thought.  How can this be done?  By bearing “leaves”
 - profession of love for Him?  No.  By bearing some fruit?  No.  “That ye bear much fruit”. In the abundance of the yield is the joy, the glory of the husbandman. We should, therefore, aim to be “hundred-fold” Christians, satisfied with none but the largest yield.  How is it to be brought about?  There is only one way, only one - abiding in Christ. 

_______________________
  From ‘Truth for the Times’, 1904
  
  
  
  
GOD GLORIFIED
  ‘God does what He does because He is what He is; and in doing what He does He displays what He is; and in displaying what He is He glorifies Himself.’
_____________________________
  From ‘Truth for the Times’, 1907
  
THE LOVE OF GOD
  What a triumph for God is this, that He should take advantage of our deep need to display His own nature! Our sin and wretchedness serve but to bring out in all its noontide splendour the love of God.  “God is love”. 

  In the Old Testament we seek in vain for this.  Those long years of man's history of which it treats were but the testing-time for man, in which his condition was fully made manifest.  It closed with the final test, the sending of God's Son.  As it is written, “
But last of all He sent unto them His Son, saying, They will reverence My Son”.  In the rejection of God's Son man proved how irremediably bad he was. The Old Testament times were characterised by the words which ended the solemn events connected with the giving of the law at Sinai 
- “The thick darkness where God was”.  (Exodus 20: 21; Ps 18: 11)  What a contrast to John 1: 18, “No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him”.  We get gleams of light in such expressions as these, 
“Thy loving-kindness is better than life”, “Who crowneth thee with lovingkindness and tender mercies”, and kindred passages.  Both light and love are rather prospective here.  As in the eastern sky at early morn the horns of light do but herald the rising of the sun, “which is as a bridegroom 
going out of his chamber” (Ps 19: 5-7), so we must wait for the advent of the Son of God into this world before we can get such blessed words as these, “For God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life”.  (John 3: 16)  Familiar words, yet so beyond us; for here the depths of God's heart are told out.  And in this Scripture we find the Son of God calling attention to that which is before Him - the lifting up of the Son of man, His own death as a sacrifice - this a proof of God's love.  Mark that little word “
for”.  If we look at the lifting up of the Son of man as man’s act (see Acts 2: 23), his hatred to God was shown thereby.  But God's love was shown also; for what brought out the sin and hatred of man's nature proved the light and love of God's.  The Son of man must be lifted up.  Our sins and God's holiness demand it.  But love provided what the holiness demanded.

  It may be helpful to the reader if we turn to some passages which speak of this wonderful love of God.  

  We shall look at it in five different ways or connections - its Manifestation, Commendation, Perfection, Manner, and Measure - 
I.  THE MANIFESTATION OF THE LOVE.

  We will turn to 1 John 4: 9, 10.  I quote the passage in full.  “In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent His only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through Him.  Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that He loved us, and sent His Son to be the propitiation for our sins”.  Now mark, in verses 7, 8 the apostle exhorts the children of God to 
“love one another”.  It has been said by another, 
‘God never needed to be exhorted to love; we do’.  But in order to produce the manifestation of love towards each other, he calls their attention to the manifestation of God's love towards them.  So before God's love can be manifested in us it must be manifested towards us.  Now see how the love is manifested toward us in the sending of His only begotten Son into the world that we might live through Him.  As children of Adam we needed a new life.  “Ye must be born again”, were the words of Jesus to one of the fairest specimens of the children of men.  You, Nicodemus, need a new life.  The love of God is 
manifested in connection with this need.  He gave the Son that we may have life.  “He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life”. 

  But not only do we need a new life, but we need, as guilty sinners, the remission of our sins.  This too the love of  God has provided.  “He sent His Son to be the propitiation for our sins”.  So in these two precious verses we find the manifestation  of God's love is connected with our twofold need.
  
We need a new life, and we need the remission of our sins.  Thank God, we have both in Him who is God's love gift.

II.  THE COMMENDATION  OF THE LOVE.

  “But God commendeth His love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us”.  Rom 5: 8) Note here too, in verse 5, where the love of God is spoken of as shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost given unto us, that we are immediately directed to when and how the love was displayed.  We are turned from the realisation of the love in us to the display of the love 
toward us.  How many are looking for the love of God in their own hearts, instead of looking away to when and how the love was displayed.  It was when we were “without strength”, 
“ungodly”, “yet sinners”, and “enemies”, Christ died for us; and herein does God commend His love.  It was when we had nothing of good to commend us to His love that God, by that very fact, commends His love towards us.

   Inscribed upon the cross we see,
        
      
In shining letters, God is love.
        
The Lamb who died upon the tree 
        
      
Has brought us mercy from above. 
  It was when the high tide of our evil rose at that cross that the love of God, in overwhelming volume, rose to its greatest height.  That love is written legibly there in the fathomless sorrows of Him who came to make it known.

III.  THE PERFECTION OF THE LOVE.

  If we again turn to 1 John 4: 17 we read, “Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment: because as He is, so are we in this world.  There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear: because fear hath torment.  He that feareth is not made perfect in love”
9. Now mark again, in this passage there is no thought of our love.  No, it is God's love with us made perfect.  It is a love that has given us the same place that Christ has.  I beg your attention to that precious sentence at the end of verse 17.  Linger over it.  Remember Who it is that says it.
  
Turn not to your poor wretched self, but let your thoughts rest on Christ, where He is, and what He is.  A Man in the glory of God, let the eye of faith rest upon Him; and while you gaze, let these words, the words of God, sweep out of your poor trembling heart every cobweb of fear.  “Boldness in the day of judgment: because as He is, so are we in this world”.  Who is the He?  It is Christ.  Who are the we?  All believers in Him.
  
So that even the weakest may say, ‘As Christ is, so are we’. 
  So the perfection of the love is seen in giving us the same place Christ has, “that we may have boldness in the day of judgment”.  It is this perfect love that casts out fear.  There can be no fear if we remember that the love of God has given us the same place Christ has.

  Where He is and what He is is the answer to where He was and what He was for us.
  We were under our sins; so was He.  He is clear from our sins; so
 are we.  We were 
sin; He was made it.  
He is God's righteousness; so are we in Him.  (2 Cor 5: 22.) We deserved the judgment of God.  He bore it, and is clear from it; so are, we.  We were in death; so was He.  He is now in life; so 
are we.
  May you, dear reader, thus know what it is to be without fear.  “Perfect love casteth out fear”.
  
We can now say, as in verse 19, “We love Him, because He first loved us”.
  We now come to -
IV.  THE MANNER OF THE LOVE.

  “Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of  God: therefore the world knoweth us not
,  because it knew Him not”.  (1 John 3: 1)  Here we find the manner of God's love is to have us in His family 
as children.  It is children here as (note verse 29 of previous chapter) “born of 
God”.  It is thus we are children.  This is the blessed relationship in which we stand to God.  He is our Father; we are His children, as begotten of Him. (Chap 5: 1.)  The consequence of this blessed relationship is, that the world knoweth us not, because it knew 
Him not.  Who is the Him here?  It is Christ, that blessed One who could say, “O righteous Father, the world hath not known Thee: but I have known Thee.

  So that the manner of the love is, that God has given us the same relationship and place that Christ had when here on this earth.  May it be ours to enjoy this relationship more, and thus be found in separation from all that is not of the Father, remembering what is said in the previous chapter, verse 15,  “If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him”. 

  We come now to our last point -
V.  THE MEASURE OF THE LOVE.

  For this we must turn to John 17: 23.  In this marvellous chapter we get the outpourings and tender solicitude of that heart which “having loved His own which were in the world, He loved them to the end”.  His desires 
for us as to the present and the future are here expressed.  
And in this verse 23 He is looking forward to that bright and blessed day when the whole family will be seen in its perfection in that glory.  “I in them, and Thou in Me
, that the world may know that Thou hast sent Me, and hast loved them, as Thou hast loved Me”.  Oh, precious sentence!  Let us hang upon it, beloved child of God.  It fell from His blessed lips in this world, and is here in God's unchanging Word for our present comfort and blessing.  If we can measure that love, the love of the Father for Him, then we can measure His love for us.  And remember this is true now.

  Oh, what a thought, our Father loves us as He loves the Son!  And not better shall we be loved in that glory than now.  We shall be in its sphere - the Father's house without a cloud - and shall enjoy it to the full, and in the glory of it the world shall know it; but it will not be more true then than now.

  So here in these precious words, “Hast loved them, as Thou hast loved Me”, we see the measure of the Father's love.
  I have thus endeavoured to bring before you the love of God in its Manifestation, Commendation, Perfection, Manner, and Measure.
  May you, dear reader, knowing and believing this love, be enabled to say in holy triumph, “I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things  present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord”. 

___________________________
  From ‘The Simple Testimony’, 1890
  
THE GOSPEL IN THE PSALMS
  It is no uncommon thing, especially in country districts, to see some aged inmate of a cottage sitting with the Bible opened at the Psalms.  Often has the writer's heart been cheered by such a sight.  Poring over  the sacred page the aged reader has doubtless found there what could be found nowhere else.  Yet what ignorance, alas! there often is even with such, touching the gospel of the grace of God, which in its fulness  and blessedness is unfolded in the New Testament.

  Now, the gospel is not the subject of the Psalms.  Still, in the Psalms we do find what constitute
s the gospel; that is, we find Christ - “The sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow” (1 Peter 1: 11) ; and it is with the thought of presenting Christ that we desire to take up certain Psalms in a gospel way.
  Let us suppose the reader to open the Book of Psalms for the first time.  He shall begin with Psalm 1: “Blessed is the man”.  How sweetly the first word falls on the ear - “Blessed”!  It is what God pronounces him to be who answers to the description given in this psalm.  “Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful.
  
But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in His law doth he meditate day and night”.  What a beautiful life this is both in its  negative and its positive side!  My reader, can you claim blessing from God on the ground 
of answering to the description here?  Have you 
never walked “in the counsel of the ungodly”?  Have you 
never stood “in the way of sinners”?  Have you 
never sat “in the seat of the scornful”?  
Have you delighted in the law of the Lord, and in His law meditated day and night?  Let such questions be answered by you in the presence of God.  No, your life and mine have been far otherwise.  One Man, and one alone, could claim blessing from God on the ground of what He was.
  
It is Jesus who fully answers to the picture - that unique and beautiful Man over whom God could open the heavens and say, “This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased”.  Surely He was that “tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither
; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper”. It is Jesus, who was all that a man should be.  His beautiful life should convince us of sin.

  We have all, like lost sheep, gone astray - He never; and He could perfectly say, “By the word of thy lips I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer”. We have found pleasure in doing our own will; He could say, “I always do the things that please My Father”.
  But let us look now at Psalm 14: 2: “The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God”. What did He see?  “They are
 all gone aside, they are all together become filthy: there is none that doeth good, no, not one”.  How emphatic and sweeping is this verse - “all”, “altogether”, “none”.  No exception among all the children of men.  Bow thine heart here and say, 
‘O God, I own that Thou hast in this scripture given me my moral photograph’. This is repentance. God would convince thee of sin, in order that thou mayest take the place of selfjudgment, and we know that He will never condemn those who condemn themselves.  Psalm 1 then is Jesus, not I; Psalm 14 is I, not Jesus.

  Now we come to Psalm 22: “My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me? why art Thou so far from helping Me, and from the words of My roaring?  O My God, I cry in the daytime, but Thou hearest not; and in the night season, and am not silent”. Well  do we know Who it is that was thus abandoned of God. “Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land until the ninth hour.  And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?”. The forsaken Man of Psalm 22 is Jesus the Son of God; the blessed, perfect Man of Psalm 1.  Dear reader, ponder these words: “why”, “Thou”, “forsaken”,  “Me”.  And when no answer came, then from out of that awful solitude, and from that heart - that broken heart which was a shrine for God's glory - came the answer which vindicated God in that forsaking: “
But Thou art holy”.  In 2 Cor  5: 21 we read: “It” or “He hath made Him to be 
sin for us”.  “Made Him 
sin”, is the answer to “forsaken Me”.  A holy God forsakes Him because He was made sin.  But this same scripture testifies, “
who knew no sin”, for He was the perfect Man of Psalm 1.  But here in Psalm 22  He, blessed be His name, takes the place of the “filthy” men of Psalm 14.  None may know what it cost Him, and none can fathom that ocean of sorrow.  There are other sorrows in this wonderful ps
alm - sorrows resulting from man’s hatred; for poor, wretched man is there.  “For dogs have compassed Me: the assembly of the wicked have inclosed Me: they pierced My hands and My feet”.  They can even gamble for His garments. 
(v 18)  But the sorrows of verses 1, 2 are atoning sorrows - it was what He endured at the hand of God as in Isaiah 53: 10, “Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise Him; 
He hath put Him to grief”.  Oh, wondrous love to give His Son! oh, infinite holiness that put Him
 to grief when made sin!  Can we wonder at the streams of blessing flowing out from verse 22 right on to millennial scenes to all who trust Him?  The bitter 
‘night of weeping’ is over in verse 21, inasmuch as He was heard and taken from the lowest point of death - “the horns of the unicorns” - after having met all the righteous claims of God, and Satan's power.  (Hebrews 2: 14, 15)  All - all - was met there; and  now joy, eternal joy, comes in the morning.  It is the resurrection morning.  All our blessings are secured in resurrection - “I will declare Thy name unto My brethren, in the midst of the congregation will I praise Thee”, “Go to My brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto My Father, and your Father; and to My God, and your God”. (John 20: 17)

  How beautifully the psalm ends.  Mark the closing sentence, “He hath done this”.  Let your eye rest upon it -  “
He hath done this”.  Now put believingly two other words - “
for me”, write your name in full at the bottom of that psalm -
For me, Lord Jesus, Thou hast died, 
     And I have died with Thee;
Thou’rt risen! my bands are all untied, 
     And now Thou liv’st in me.
The Father's face of radiant grace 
     Shines now in light on me.
  Yes, you say, ‘for me’ - for the “me” of Psalm 14.
  Now turn to Psalm 32.  Again are we greeted by that precious word “
Blessed”.  “Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered
.  Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile”.  Now this is true of thee, dear reader, if thou hast written thy name at the foot of Psalm 32.  Thou art without doubt the blessed man of Psalm 32.  God accounts thee righteous - the God “
that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification”.  (Rom 4: 24, 25)  It is not what we think, feel, or realise; but it is what God 
says in His word.  (Acts 13: 38, 39; Eph 1: 7; Col 1: 14)  So the sinless man of Psalm 
1 dies in Psalm 22 for the sinful men of Psalm 14 in order that the sinful men of Psalm 14  may be in the blessing of the man of Psalm 32. 

  It is interesting to note also that this is the first “Maschil” Psalm.  “Maschil” means 
‘giving instruction’.  It is the first instruction God gives to men. May you, my reader, be thus instructed and blessed.

  Another word.  The man who is thus blessed and instructed can now go back to Psalm 1, and seek to walk in the footsteps of this blessed One.  He  hath left us an example, that  we should walk in His steps.  (1 Peter 2: 21)  Who are the people of whom this is said?  In chapter
 1: 9 we are told they had already received “the end of their faith”, the salvation of their souls.  And again in chapter 2: 24, “Who His own self bare our sins in His own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness”.  It is because they were forgiven, justified, saved, that thus they were exhorted.
  
So in 1 John 2: 6, “He that saith he abideth in Him ought himself also so to walk, even as He walked”. But note a little lower down, in verse 12, he says, “I write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you for His name's sake”.  They were in the blessing of Psalm 32.  We must know Him as Saviour before we can have Hirn as an example.  We must be 
instructed and blessed before we can be exhorted to walk in His footsteps.  
May it be our joy and blessing thus to walk
  ‘Till travelling days are done.’
_______________________
  From ‘The Simple Testimony’, 1909
  
A FEW THOUGHTS ON THE PSALMS
  The Book of Psalms begins with ”Blessed is the man” and ends with “Praise ye the Lord”.  
Man blessed on the earth and Jehovah praised from the earth gives a complete idea of the scope of the Psalms.
  Psalm 1 is Christ characteristically.  There is to be a congregation of the righteous.

  Psalm 2 is Christ personally and officially, rejected by man but exalted and saluted by God.  
“Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion”.  “The Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee”.  
 
  Israel said of Reuben, “Thou art my firstborn … the excellency of dignity and the excellency of power”.  
Psalm 1 is the dignity, Psalm 2 the strength, answering to the two pillars in the temple.  Jachin: “He will establish”.  Boaz: “In him is strength”.
  
The moral precedes the official.
  Psalms 3 to 8 are five experimental psalms.
  Psalm 3 is salvation.  The man is heard and sustained from the place where Jesus is (the “holy hill”), while meeting with the opposition in the place where Jesus was.  The opposition is against Jehovah and His anointed, as in Psalm 2.  (See Acts 4: 23-31)

  Psalm 4.  The appeal is to the God of righteousness.  In the way of righteousness he is taunted by the sons of men, 
“Jehovah will hear” (v 3) and the “light of his countenance” who turn his glory into shame; but in this way he has two compensations. (v 6)  A heart assured and satisfied.  Psalm 3 is the rest of protection; Psalm 4 the rest of satisfaction.  In Psalm 5 he directs his prayer to God in the sense of what is due to Him in holiness.  He hath not pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with Him, and drawing near to God in His house he worships in His holy temple.  It is holiness which shrinks from evil, and confidence in God's deliverance, which is looked for and counted upon.

  Psalm 6 is discipline.  Chastened and sifted he has confidence in Jehovah, with whom he is in relationship.

  Psalm 7 is the final vindication of the righteous and of Jehovah's ways with them, and this introduces us to the “world to come” in Psalm 8.  The 
last verse of this psalm is the link, when he praises Jehovah for his righteousness, and sings forth the name of Jehovah, the most High.
  Psalm 8.  Upon the Gittith is the harvest home psalm.  Here the name of Jehovah, our Adonai, is “
excellent … in all the earth”.  
And all is in subjection to the Son of Man.  (See 1 Cor 15; Heb 2; Eph 1)  It is the climax to the synopsis of the “whole book, and brings us in to the “world to come”, setting forth the blessedness of that world where all is in subjection to the Lord, whose name is excellent in all the earth.

  The first eight psalms are a complete little Book of Psalms in themselves.  

___________________
  Psalm 9 begins another section which more directly places us in the circumstances of the last days.
  Psalms 9 and 10 seem to run together and form an alphabetical acrostic.  In Psalm 10, from verses 2 to 12, the acrostic is dropped, and in those verses we get the man of sin 
morally described; the acrostic is resumed from verse 12 to the end.  These two psalms seem to set forth the throne of God in a Man, and the throne of Satan in a man.

  Psalms 11 to 14 give the exercises proper to the godly remnant in connection with the presence and power of Antichrist.  In Psalm 11 Jehovah’s temple and throne are recognised and looked to, therefore the foundations are not destroyed.  Verse 6 is the antitype of the destruction of Sodom.  (See Rev 16: 18-21)

  In Psalm 12 the lips and words of men in their pride are contrasted with the words of God, which are pure.  Verse 5 describes Pharaoh's pride and oppression of the people of God in Exodus, but Jehovah arises to set in safety the afflicted, crushed under the opposition of the wicked.

  Psalm 13 expresses the desire under great pressure (“How long?”) to be kept awake lest he “sleep the sleep of death”.  
He confides in the loving-kindness of Jehovah and the psalm closes in great rejoicing.
  Psalm 14 shews the folly of the exclusion of God; but Jehovah looks down from heaven to see, and finds none answering to Himself “none good, no, not one”.  
Yet there were His people, His “afflicted” ones, with whom He could be on the ground of redemption.  In principle Balaam and Balak question in verses 4, 5 and 6, but salvation is looked for “out of 
Zion”.  
In Psalm 15 the questions are asked, “who shall abide?” and “who shall dwell?”  
Then later, the Man is described who shall “never be moved”.
  In Psalm 15 the man is asked for who can dwell in the hill of Jehovah's holiness, and in Psalm 16 the Man is found.  “
I have found ...  a man after mine own heart, which sha
ll fulfil all my will”.  

  Psalm 16 sets before us the Man who has God for His head.  “The head of Christ is God”.
  
It is a Michtam Psalm - a golden jewel, to be set in our hearts.  There are nine characteristics of His holy humanity.  Every sentence has reference to 
God, and is proper to a man who has God for his head.  Note the way it is quoted in the testimony of the gospel in the Acts, both by Peter and Paul.  The doctrine of the latter has its 
moral springs in this truly blessed psalm.  It is the path of life, ending in fulness of joy at Jehovah's right hand.  

  Psalm 17 is a prayer.  There are five psalms thus entitled, which are very instructive.  Here Christ is seen in the path of righteousness with 
outward pressures; in Psalm 16 we get the inward principles which governed Him.
  His appeal is on the ground of righteousness, “Hear the right”, and others are associated with Him as in verses 7 and 11.  He awaits His vindication in resurrection, which is implied in the last verse: “I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness”.  

  Psalm 18 is also a resurrection psalm, and speaks of deliverance, righteousness and power.  Here Christ, as God's King (v 50), in the triumph of His “great deliverance”, secures all for Israel on the ground of the sure mercies of David, or the platform of resurrection.  I judge that in 2 Samuel 22 David is more before us, but here it is Christ, and all is ordered and sure in Him.

  These three psalms form a complete group.
_______________
  Psalm 19 gives us, first, creatorial testimony, which is objective, continuous and universal.  In the heavens are set the symbols of grace. (Rom 10: 18)  Secondly, we have the testimony of the law, and this works subjectively, so that the Object of life becomes the rule of life within.  It ends with a desire to know it and to answer to it.  “Let the words of my 
mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my redeemer”.  (v 14)

  In Psalm 20 Messiah is seen and appreciated in His humiliation.  The remnant gives expression to its desires for Him, “Jehovah fulfil all thy petitions”. (v 5)  Mephibosheth, in the light of David's return to Jerusalem, can say of Ziba, “Yea, let him take all”.  

  In Psalm 21 the desire is answered, and we have a glorified Messiah.
  These two psalms exemplify what another has said, ‘He wins our hearts by His humiliation, and satisfies our hearts by His glory’.  

  Psalm 22 is the great sorrow psalm of the first book, with its title “Aijeleth Shahar”.  
The hind of the morning.  It is the bitter night of weeping which ushers in the joys of an everlasting day.  In the first part (vv 1, 2) the Lord is entirely 
alone, but in verse 22 the platform of resurrection is reached, the brethren are embraced, and the name declared.
  Note. - It is a worshipping seed which is secured and which is accounted to the Lord for a generation who shall declare His righteousness.  Psalm 16 is the Man, Psalm 21
 the King, Psalm 22 the Priest.
  Psalm 23 presents to us the great Shepherd in resurrection.  (See Heb 13: 20) He leads as Moses, He sustains as Aaron, He administers as David.  The pathway ends in the house of Jehovah.

  Psalm 24 states that the earth is Jehovah's, and its fulness, and they that dwell therein.  It gives us His creatorial rights.  The question is raised in verse 3, “Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord?” - that is, Who shall hold things for God - and, “who shall stand in his holy place?”  The One who stands with God is the One who holds and administers all for God.  His hand is clean, His heart is pure, His soul is not lifted up to vanity, and “He shall receive the blessing from Jehovah, and righteousness from the God of his salvation”.  It is He who gives character to a generation who seek His face in Jacob.

  This blessed One, who as Man holds all for Jehovah, is none other than the “King of glory”, the Jehovah of hosts!
  It is to be noticed that where the Lord's true and perfect humanity is unfolded His deity is asserted or implied.
  This Psalm (24) ends a group of nine psalms in which is a very rich and comprehensive presentation of Christ.  


  SECTION II
  Psalm 25.  We now commence a group of fifteen experimental psalms, in which there is an apprehension of grace which must necessarily follow on Psalm 22, which presents the sin offering.  Previously there had been no confession of sin or desire for forgiveness; but here in Psalm 25 we have this confession and desire.  (vv 7, 11, 18)

  It is in the form of an acrostic, so one could say it is the A B C of conversion, in which are formed all the moral elements of it: confidence in God, forgiveness sought, and a desire to be directed by God in His ways and paths.  It closes with a desire that integrity and uprightness may preserve, and looks for redemption for Israel.  This psalm calls for attention, as in it are found the moral springs of much that follows.

  Psalm 26 is an appeal to Jehovah on the ground of integrity and confidence in Him; therefore he does not slip or waver.  He loves the habitation of Jehovah's house and the place where His glory dwells. (v 8)  He desires to act consistently with “the law of the house”.  “Shall be most holy”.  Note, this is said both as to the law of the sin-offering and the law of the house.  (See Lev 6: 25; Ezek 43: 12.)  In Psalm 22 the law of the house is established, and in this psalm the law of the house is recognised, hence the intense separation from all that is contrary to that, the habitation of Jehovah’s house which He loved.  He being in moral accord with it both as to his hands and feet, has ability to approach; to “compass thine altar, O Lord”, and publish with the voice of thanksgiving.

  It concludes with the foot standing in an even place, where Jehovah is known and blessed.
  Psalm 27 gives us his desire to dwell in the house (v 4); and not only the desire but the purpose, he seeks it.  To dwell there all the days of his life, and to behold the beauty or graciousness of Jehovah.  (See Ps 63: 2)

  He desires the place for communion; but when there is sheltered, hidden, concealed, lifted up: so in the time of trouble he sings in the presence of his enemies.  What God is for us inside strengthens us in the presence of our enemies outside.

  The latter part of the psalm from verse 7 is rather difficult to connect with the former part, but rather suggests the testings of faith, and the last verse connects with the first verse, that is, the first verse is the result of his waiting upon Jehovah.
  Psalm 28.  The silence of Jehovah is deprecated (see Ps 22: 2), but Jehovah is his Rock, the unchangeable One.

  He lifts up his hands towards the oracle of his holiness; in the intelligence of what is suitable to Jehovah he sees the judgment of those who do not regard His deeds or the work of His hands, and predicts their downfall.
  In verse 6 Jehovah has not been silent to him, so he blesses Jehovah, who is his strength and shield; also he sees Jehovah to be the strength and salvation of His people, the Anointed being its measure, a very important principle, and to be much noted in the psalms.  We also have to learn that what God is for Christ He is for us.

  Psalm 29 is the glory psalm.  Here is found the expression “God of glory”.  In verses 1 and 2 all created intelligences are called upon to give Jehovah glory; it is their true happiness to do so.  Verse 3 begins with the manifestation of glory, which seems to be figured by one of the Jehovah storms prevalent in Palestine at certain times of the year.  It begins in the north, and sweeping down through the land dies away in the wilderness of Kadesh.

  This glory is manifested in His voice seven times, and it ends with a temple every whit of which says “Glory”, a structure to utter glory.  So the assembly in Ephesians 3, built up in Christ Jesus, is a fitting vessel to express the glory of God.  The psalm closes with the assurance that Jehovah sits upon the flood, and will give strength to His people, and bless them with peace.  It is a beautifully suggestive psalm, and is distinguished by the expression “God of glory”, which is only found here in the Old Testament.

  It seems to close the grouping of these five psalms.
____________________
  Psalm 30.  This psalm sets before us a deeply important and blessed lesson we all have to learn: the 
morning (v 5) is better than the mountain.  (v 7)

  It seems that David had been let down into death, but was healed, raised, quickened and delivered; thus he calls on all the saints to sing psalms to Jehovah (v 4). “For a moment is passed in his anger, a life in his favour; at even weeping cometh for the night, and at morn there is rejoicing”.  

  In verse 6 he gives a past experience in which he was in apparent security: his mountain by the favour of God standing strong; but this favour was withdrawn, and he was plunged into the bitter night of weeping.  A mountain in scripture seems to indicate blessing from God, established on the earth, something temporal, in which we recognise His goodness and favour.  “
By thy favour”, not by his wit or skill: all was piously recognised as coming from God, but our true blessing lies in the knowledge of God Himself.
  Jacob had to say, “As for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little way to come unto Ephrath: and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath; the same is Bethlehem”.  
A “little way” through sorrow to Christ; and then as another has said, “The grave of our earthly hopes becomes the birth-place of our heavenly hopes”.  

  So with Job, his mountain was made to stand strong by the favour of God, which he piously recognised; but he tells us in the midst of it all he had fears, and so it came to pass his mountain went, but be came by the loss of all to a true knowledge of himself, and thereby into a knowledge of God, thus finding that God was better than His blessings.  The 
morning was better than the mountain.  Hezekiah was let down into death as in this psalm, and brought up out of it; so after his recovery, at the conclusion of his writing, he says, 
“Jehovah was purposed to save me. - And we will play upon my stringed instruments all the days of our life, in the house of Jehovah”.  

  So here in this psalm, “Thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing: thou hast put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness; to the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent”.  

  So the Lord could say to His sorrowing disciples, with the dark shadow of His death and departure upon their spirits, “Your sorrow shall be turned into joy … and your joy no man taketh from you”.
  It was the joy of finding Him, and knowing Him the other side of death.  The apparent loss of their earthly hopes was true gain, as they 
were taught by Him, who owned them as “brethren”, that heavenly relationship and blessing were greater than earthly blessing.
  The “morning” is better than the mountain! 
  Psalm 31.  Here the godly soul is in the presence of adversaries, “the sons of men”, who are very fully described, but his confidence is in Jehovah his God, whose goodness never fails.  
“How great is thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee”.  
God had known his soul in adversity, and had not shut him up into the hand of the enemy.
  This psalm very fully shews how God is for His people, and the blessedness of confidence in Him is also greatly emphasised.  In the language of verse 5 the Lord upon the cross expresses this confidence to His Father, “
Into thy hands I commend my spirit”.  How fully is this in keeping with the gospel in which it is found.

  In some features the preceding psalm is much like John, and this like Luke; but we must bear in mind we have not in the Psalms what is proper to Christian relationships, though they may be suggested anticipatively.  

______________________
  From ‘Mutual Comfort’, 1918
  
GOD’S KING
  This blessed Lord has qualified Himself as Man to hold everything for God.  Hence, when the thief was on the cross, - the blessed Lord was there dying for him, but the Spirit of God was brooding over his soul and doing a mighty work in him.  The effect of that brooding was this: that he travels a marvellous moral journey.  He must die, but he took a magnificent journey.  He journeyed from the man that was here, to the Man that had done nothing amiss.  He travelled from the man who had done everything amiss, to the Man who had done  nothing  amiss.  He saw the excellence of dignity; he saw the moral beauty of the One who was dying at his side.

  Hence he came to the conclusion that this Man must be KING! the One who said, ‘I hold up the pillars of it’, for he said, “Lord, remember me when  thou comest into thy kingdom”.
  That is, he recognised that such an One should be King; he recognised these two things in that Person.  There was nothing outwardly to speak of it, but the Spirit of God brooded over his soul, and caused him to understand that although he was the man who had done everything amiss, here was a Man who had done nothing amiss, and  that Man  must be King!

______________________
  From ‘Mutual Comfort’, 1918

READING OF THE SCRIPTURES
  The scriptures should be read in a prayerful, reverent spirit. This is becoming, for it is the written word of God and, like the living Word of whom it speaks, a revelation from and of God.  Proverbs 22: 17, 18 sets forth the way in which we should read scripture.

  “Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise”.  Here we find the listening and submissive ear.  And as the Lord said, “If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine”. 

  “And apply thine heart unto my knowledge”.  This is application, and supposes the heart or affections engaged with the truth.  And this will be the case if we read the scripture to find Christ there.

  “It is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee”.  This implies meditation. 

  “Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them”. 
  “They shall withal be fitted to thy lips”.  
“Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks”. 
  What comes from the inward parts to the lips is effectual ministry. Not from our heads, but from our whole moral being.  We do well to remember this in these days of mental activity.

  So the order is: Subjection, application, meditation and ministration. 
___________________________
  From ‘Tidings of Life and Peace’


THE LIGHT OF LIFE
John 8
  They were convicted and went out one by one.  As sure as the sun rises in the east and sets in the west, when you come into contact with God you are exposed.  There was exposure, and they could not bear it, and I will tell you why:  they 
had a character to maintain.  They went out one by one, went out to their religion, their prayer-saying, their confessions, but they went out into religious darkness, and there is no darkness like religious darkness.  They came in in religious hate, and they went out into religious darkness, and that to maintain their character before their fellows.  “How can ye believe which receive honour one of another?”  When you get into the presence of God you get far removed from the opinions of men.  Don’t shrink from exposure, because the light that exposes you discloses what God is.  
If the light exposes my evil to me, it is that I may learn the exceeding good that is in Him.  I love to think of that - what a wonderful thing it is!  If I have to learn the evil that is in myself, it is that I may know that there is goodness in God that is greater than my evil.  That is what we have in the blessed God.  God is saying, I want you to know Me, and that your salvation lies not in what you are, or what you can be, but in what I am.  Your salvation lies not in what you are, but in what God is.  Oh, He is so blessed!  He has made it possible for us to find a home in His blessed presence.  He will not condone evil, but His goodness is greater than my evil.  I cherish that thought, God has overcome evil in me, by good in Himself, and He has put me on that line – to “overcome evil with good.”  There is exposure here, and these men were afraid of the light, because their deeds were evil.  God always looks at deeds according to the motive that leads to them.  They were doing good, in a way, and would credit themselves with it.  The devil does not mind what good you do, so long as you credit yourself with it.  We have the idea that Satan is down in the slums, but Satan is in the synagogue in Scripture.  Satan is seeking to dishonour God.  They went out to their alms, to their prayers, but in religious darkness.  What could the woman do?  She had no character to maintain - where could she go?  She had to stay there.  And what does the Lord say?  The Lord says, “Where are those thine accusers?  Hath no man condemned thee?”  She said, “No 
man, Lord.”   And Jesus said unto her, “Neither do I condemn thee: go and sin no more.”  “Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world, he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have Light of Life.”

_______________________
  From Living Words for Needy Souls, 4th edition





A FAITHFUL SAYING
  “This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.”
  The greatest religionist, the greatest moralist that ever lived was “the chief of sinners”, because there never was a heart of man that hated Christ like that man’s - he hated Jesus of Nazareth.  The blessed Lord looked down on him as he went to Damascus, and He says, I’ll capture that heart, and put into that heart My mighty love.  The eye of that blessed One is on you, He desires to capture your heart.  Will you let Him?  He is waiting to put His mighty love into your heart.  Will you let Him?  Paul could say after his heart was captured, “The life I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, 
who loved me and gave himself for me”.  That was a wonderful capture.

_______________________
  From Living Words for Needy Souls, 4th edition

THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD
  “Aquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace: thereby good shall come unto thee.” Job 22: 21.
  By the sorrows and death of Jesus, hear God saying, Acquaint now thyself with Me, and be at peace.  He goes down into death, but it was impossible for death to hold Him.  God has raised Him from the dead.  The God you had sinned against, the God who gave Jesus, has raised Him from the dead; and by that resurrection God is saying, Acquaint now thyself with Me, and be at peace.

  “Who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification.”
  God has found infinite satisfaction in the work of His Son, and He is saying, Acquaint now thyself with Me, and be at peace.
  The One who was on the cross, who was in the grave, is now in heaven.  He 
made our peace on the cross, He is our peace in heaven, and from the glory there God is saying, Acquaint now thyself with Me, and be at peace.
  Listen to the Lord’s touching lamentation over Jerusalem.  “If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace!  But now they are hid from thine eyes.”  

  “Acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee.”
_______________________
  From Living Words for Needy Souls, 4th edition

GOD’S INTEREST IN ONE SOUL
  Job 32: 1-4; 33: 6, 7, 23
  I do not know whether you have read this Book of Job.  I want to show you the point of it.  It is very interesting in this respect - it shows 
God's interest in one soul.  The soul of man is so precious to God that this book is all about one man - all about Job.  Are you not struck with the fact that God is interested in one soul?  My dear friend, it is my joy to tell you that God is interested in 
your soul; you may not be interested in it; you may have passed your time in neglect of it.  It is sad to see how people neglect this most important matter.  Not that you do not intend 
some time to pay attention to it, but the devil has succeeded so far, and you have lent a willing ear to him.  He has succeeded, as he did with me once, in persuading you to shelve this question.  You think more about business matters - the things of this life - than the interests of your soul;
 that shall be attended to at some future time, you say.  I would urge you to care for it 
now.
  God was interested in Job.  Here is one book of forty-two chapters - all about 
one soul.
  In the first chapter we are permitted to hear an interview between God and Satan.  We are told there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and 
Satan also came among them.  God asked him a question, “Whence comest thou
?”  He says, “From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it”.
 Satan is a real being - God's most determined foe.  When God created him he was the very brightest creature, but he
 was a creature.  
He is called in Ezekiel 28, “The anointed cherub that covereth”, but he was a creature.  Michael, when contending with him about the body of Moses, had such a sense of his dignity that he said,
 “The Lord rebuke thee”.  He “durst not bring against him a railing accusation
”.  I think we have little idea of the awful foe we have in Satan, but, thank God, he is a defeated foe.  The Son of God has been down into death and robbed him of his power, but 
he is a foe; his one desire is to draw you down into that awful pit; he has set his heart on your destruction.  May God wake you up.

  God says to Satan, “Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God and escheweth evil?”  God praises Job.

  Satan says, Let me go down and take away all he has, and he will curse Thee to Thy face.  Oh, it is a wonderful thing to get

The Curtain drawn aside
like this.  Satan goes down; all is swept away - Job's property, his children - all is gone!  Do you think God is unkind to do that?  What will God not do to reach a soul?  He is not unkind; He is “
very pitiful, and of tender mercy”, James 5: 11.  You may say, His ways with me are very hard; you do not know my trials.  Let me say to you, God has got 
eternity before Him; and in sweeping away things here He would show you the blessed reality of things there.  Well, Job's things are swept away, and he 
says, “The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord”.
  In the next chapter we are permitted to hear another interview.  Satan says, “
Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life”.  God permits Satan to go down 
and smite that man “with sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown”. Yet there was nothing harsh about it, as I will show you presently.
  His wife comes and says, “Curse God, and die”.  He replies, “What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?  In all this Job did not sin with his lips”.
  Now his three friends come to sit down with him seven days, mute with grief.  No grief like Job's save the unparalleled grief of the Son of God.  At last - 

Job's Heart
is charged, and out it comes.  He curses the day he was born.  These three men, in substance, say to Job, If you had not been a very wicked man God would never have allowed this to happen.  Then out comes from Job’s heart what God wanted to root out.  What is it?  
Self-righteousness; he prides himself in it.  What! says he, you think I have been a very bad man.  I will tell you  and then he 
draws a photograph of himself.  “I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame”, and
 so on.  It all comes out of his heart: he prides himself in his righteousness, and God says, I cannot have that, and He proceeds to deal with Job.

Job ends; God begins.
  Now we come to the end of the book.  They have been wrangling on through the book - Job and his friends.  
Now “the words of Job are ended”, (chap 31: 40) and it is time for God to begin.  

  Perhaps you, too, are clinging to something.  You cannot say as Job did, 
“I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame”, etc.; but then God would not have that if you could.  You will have to let go all your own thoughts of goodness before you can be saved.  

  When “the words of Job are ended” you find another person comes on the scene - a fourth person - Elihu.  We have not read about him before.  He is 
a picture of the Saviour  his name implies it - 
God is He.  
When Job's words are ended he is all ready for a Saviour.  
Elihu is one of the most striking pictures of the Saviour.  He was angry with Job on the one side, and with his three friends on the other.  With Job because he 
justified himself rather than God.  Job spoke well of himself rather than of God.  God would not have you speak well of yourself.  The saved soul - the soul that has been in the presence of God - will not have a good word to say for himself, save what grace has done for him.

  And what did the three friends do?  They condemned Job without convincing him.  I’ll tell you what God is doing now.  He is convincing men in order that they may 
condemn themselves.  God does not condemn, but He is convincing sinners of their sinfulness in order that they may condemn themselves; and 
when a man condemns himself God will never condemn him.
  This is Repentance.
Repentance is not sorrow for sin merely - that is in it - but it is a deeper thing than that.  Listen to that man in Luke 18: 
Two men went up into the temple to pray”. You know the story; the Saviour told it.  The first stood there - a great religionist - and he prays with himself, “
I thank thee, that I am not as other men are ... or even as this publican.  I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess”.
 That man is justifying himself.  A man never can be saved as long as he keeps on that tack.

  But look at that other man.  He has such a sense of sinfulness, he bows his head and says, “
God be merciful to me a sinner”.
  Have you taken that place before God?  I do not ask if you have said what so many say - I know we are all sinners.  It matters not if you have read it out of a book, or said it in a public assembly.  Have you said it 
alone with God? You cannot be saved in a crowd; repentance is an individual thing.

Job's Verdict
  Elihu's wrath is kindled against Job because he justified himself, and against Job's three friends because they had found no answer and yet had condemned him.
  Now God says, I am going to convince you.  If you turn on to chapter 40, verse 3, you 
read, “Then Job answered the Lord”.  God grant you may take your place with 
Job.  “Then Job answered
 the Lord, and said, I am vile; what shall I answer thee?  
I will lay my hand upon my mouth.  Once have I spoken; but I will not answer
: yea, twice; but I will proceed no further”.  He says, I have said too much, I have been praising myself, but now 
I am vile, I AM VILE!  Will you join in with Job and say, 
“I am vile”?  
If you do not condemn yourself God will condemn you, but if you condemn yourself God will never condemn you.  Thank God!  Job has come to that point.  He says, I have talked too much; I will proceed no further.  I was out of Thy presence when I justified myself.  He is going to let God talk now.  He does not 
‘let go the twig’ entirely till you come to the last chapter.  “I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye seeth thee.  Wherefore 
I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes”.  “Now mine eye seeth thee
” - seeth THEE! “Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes”.  Now he lets God talk.  That is where he gets the blessing.  He is ready for Elihu now.

“The Daysman”
  Now let us look at the scripture.  I read, “Behold, I am according to thy wish 
in God's stead”; that looks on to Jesus here.  “I also am formed out of the clay.  Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid”.  In a previous chapter Job had said, “Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both”.  He wanted a daysman that could lay hold of 
God with one hand and man with the other.  Now Elihu says, “I am ... in God's stead” - that
 looks on to Jesus. Elihu says, “I also am formed out of the clay,” but who is Jesus?  
“Over all, God blessed for ever”. Here is One - Jesus - who can lay hold of Godhead, and yet verily a Man!  That is the Person you want, the Saviour.  And what does He say to you, poor trembling 
soul?  “My terror shall not 
make thee afraid” - draw near to Him: He puts His pierced hand upon you  “Neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee”.  The 
hand of God was heavy upon Him when He was upon the cross.  
Jesus - who is over all, blessed for ever  draws near to you; He puts His hand upon you.  You fear God.  You say, I have a sense 
of my sinfulness.  The Saviour draws near to you, my blessed Master, the true Elihu.  What does He say?  “My terror shall not make thee afraid”.
  At mount Sinai He came down with His fiery law, and even Moses said, “
I exceedingly fear and quake”.  There is no fiery law now; but with a heart 
big with love, “full of grace and truth”, He went to the cross.  God's hand was heavy upon Him, that it might never be heavy upon you.  If you take the place Job took here, you shall know His 
pierced hand upon you, you shall know the Saviour.
God's Message
  And what does He say?  “
I have found a ransom”.  You cannot find one.  Where has God found it?  
In His own bosom!  His own blessed Son given to be a sacrifice.  Have you accepted what God has found?  He does not ask 
you to find anything.  He only asks you to take your true place, and then you shall know that God has found what you could never find.  “Deliver him from going down to the pit
: I have found a ransom”.  The 6th and 7th verses present the 
Person of Christ; the 24th verse presents the work of Christ.  Blessed be God, He has found a ransom; all His claims have been met; that blessed Saviour paid the debt on the cross, and now 
He is on the throne!
  There are two things here -
Ransom and Resurrection.
  We have Christ for the Ransom; and then there is the resurrection of Christ.  He has been raised 
for the justification of those who believe; Romans 4: 25.  Elihu says, then, “He shall 
sing” - oh, I like that.  Sing!  What about?  “He will sing before men, and will say, I have sinned, and perverted what was right, and it hath not been requited to me”.

  He has had mercy on me, a poor sinner, with nothing at all, but I can sing, and I have been singing, that the mercy that has reached me can reach you.  
Oh, will you have it?
The Approaching Storm
  There is one other scripture in this Book, chapter 36: 18, a very solemn verse, “because there is wrath” - not now, thank God.  What is it now?  “My terror shall not make thee afraid”.  But, oh, there is a storm-cloud which will burst on this earth, burst on the unrepentant for ever.  “Because there is wrath, beware!”  Beware of what?  “
Lest he take thee away with his stroke”.  What then?  “Then a great ransom cannot deliver 
thee”.  A great ransom will never deliver you if you pass into eternity in your sins.  No human language can describe what will be the result if man persists in his course - the wrath that awaits him there.  What will his riches avail then? 
 Nothing, NOTHING! This scripture says so.  Oh, I would plead with you.  Get into the place Job took; say, 
“I am vile”. God grant it, for Christ's sake.
_______________________
  Published as a tract by Kingston Bible Trust

DISCIPLINE - CHASTISEMENT - INSTRUCTION10
Job 36: 10
     
You are left here to be educated for another world.  S
ome people think that discipline is punishment. It is not so, discipline is education - often painful but necessary, that we might gain the Knowledge of God - the great thing is to take everything from His hand and not to be occupied with second causes. There is something very insipid about a person who has a very even life, so do not be afraid of discipline:- There are four ways in which we are disciplined - In 1 Corinthians 11 in connection with the Lord's supper, it is Corrective; in 2 Corinthians 12: 7, it is Preventive, “Lest I should be exalted”; in Hebrews 12: 8, it is Formative, “That we might be partakers of His holiness”; and in John 16: 2, for the Production of more fruit.
     
Your growth is seen in the way you appreciate the will of God, in connection with your destiny; and in the way you can bear with your brethren.
______________________
  From an un-dated card

EDITOR’S NOTES
  
Notes
[?1]
The manuscript has been changed twice in this sentence to substitute ‘can’ for ‘cannot’; read with both the preceding and following remarks, ‘cannot’ appears to be a mis-transcription. (page 42)
[?2]
the original manuscript had ‘loved by divine energy’ here, but see the final paragraph of this address.  
(page 46)
[?3]
, 4 & 6  
John 1: 1-3 teaches as to the eternal divine nature and glory of the Word - it is the foundation of Scripture. John 1: 14-18 presents a relationship in which the Word, the Son of God, is seen as becoming flesh.  
He took “a bondman’s form” and was “found in figure as a man” (Phil 2: 7, 8): “God has been manifested in flesh” (1 Tim 3: 16), that is in that form and condition.  
 (page 95)
[?4]
See above note. (page 183)
[?5]
Older translations of Revelation 22: 19, including the King James Version, are based on a very faulty Greek text of Revelation and have “God shall take away his part out of the book of life”.  The Darby Translation reads: “God shall take away his part from the tree of life” - 
neither blotting out nor the book of life occurs.  Both ideas 
are in Revelation 3: 5 - where those previously mentioned who have “a name to live” only are not contemplated as in the book of life at all.  
(page 207)
[?6]
See above note.  
(page 249)
[?7]
The Lord in John 14: 17 speaks of an objective knowledge of the Spirit preceding what is in us - “ye know him, for he abides with you, and shall be in you”.  
(page 261)
[?8]
There is no record from biblical times of this introduction of Psalms into God’s prescribed order for the Passover.  
We are told that they sang a ‘hymn’ after the Supper before leaving the upper room.  
(page 311)
_________________________
The footnotes on pages 364 and 390 were in the original script, as were any square brackets.  The first two of the above end-notes mark the only places in this book where the wording as found has been altered, apart from the adjustment of incorrect quotations.  Our brother’s ministry is consistent throughout with what was received and ministered by others in his time.  
These end-notes are not written with any thought to be contentious (1 Cor 11: 16 ), but for the consideration and judgment of the reader (Acts 17: 11; 1 Thess 5: 21).  (I have given in brackets the pages where these notes have been inserted) 
– EDITOR

[?9]
See marginal reading
[?10]
Hebrew word Musar translated once “Discipline”, 3 times “Chastisement”, 8 times “Corrective” and 30 times “Instruction”.

     
