{#First Things and Other Ministry by Jim Renton - Volume 1}
{0}
INTRODUCTION
This is one of two volumes which collect the articles of ministry by our brother Jim Renton that were first published in two magazines, A Word in its Season and Notes of Ministry.  Almost none were published anywhere else, although there is a reading at three-day meetings in London in 1976 which also appeared in the book from those meetings.  The articles run in date order from 1972 up to just before the Lord took our brother on 17 January 1994.  I have added to these previously published articles ten other hitherto unpublished pieces for which records came to hand while the books were being assembled; these are identified by end notes.  The articles are arranged in date order, with four un-dated pieces at the end of the second volume.
The two magazines, which have continued with a succession of editors from 1973 until now, have a wealth of recent ministry, but very few original sets remain, so that this resource has become inaccessible - and unknown to those who did not have the magazines when they were issued.  While this can be remedied by making a digital edition, others may agree with me that there is also value in printed books.  I have therefore embarked on an exercise to make collections like this one of ministry given by various brothers who have been especially helped in ministry over the years; and it is a relatively simple task now to make these into books.  This one will be available in print, and for e-readers.
Articles in these magazines were normally revised by the brother serving and by the editors.  I have made very few changes beyond some adjustment to the formatting to achieve a common style.  I have not tried to find references for all the citations from other ministry -- it would be an invidious task; and I have left them as first published.  I have lightly edited some of the previously unpublished articles.
I remember Jim Renton and his ministry with much affection -- he was humble and brotherly, with a sustained interest in the welfare of those with whom he had fellowship; he was not only active in the ministry himself, but very supportive of others serving in the Lord's work.  I trust others who are now able to read this selection will profit from it for the glory of the Lord.
Andrew Burr
2020
Edited and Published by Andrew Burr
81 Roxburgh Road London SE27 0LE UK
Isbn 978-0-244-57375-1
2020
{1}
GOD'S WORKMANSHIP
@Ephesians 2:8-10
I desire to say a few words about God's workmanship.  It would be good for us all to realise that there is such a thing as God's workmanship, something that is entirely of God.  Nothing of human ability comes into it.  From start to finish, it is God's workmanship, a wonderful thing to consider.  Nothing of the fallen state of man comes into it.  It is not only God's work but God's workmanship, involving the skill of the Operator, having in mind a finished article.  There could be no improvement on God's workmanship.  It is that in which God finds delight because it proceeds from Him, it is according to Him, and is to be His own finished product.  It is seen and will be seen in persons.  Paul says, "We are his workmanship".  We are not here to eulogise our brother, but I am sure I can say that he was an excellent example of God's work.  Eulogy would have been the last thing our brother would desire.  He would rather attention was called to the Lord Jesus who has provided the righteous basis in His blood and is the Pattern of all for God's pleasure and as the Man Christ Jesus sustains all.  The Holy Spirit now operates from this standpoint.
Now this section from which I have read (from verses 1 to 10) describe what is entirely God's work.  The material is persons who were dead in offences and sins.  There could not be more unlikely material, and that is what everybody is naturally, what our brother was naturally.  We are all the same, the most unsuitable material you could think of, and yet what is introduced is God's workmanship.  It says, "For ye are saved by grace, through faith; and this not of yourselves; it is God's gift; not on the principle of works, that no one might boast".  We have nothing to boast about because it is "not of yourselves; it is God's gift".  In the end, God's workmanship only will remain.  It is what goes through into eternity for God's pleasure, nothing else goes through but God's workmanship.  Every believer is part of His workmanship and now is the time when the workmanship proceeds, when growth proceeds.  It is in view of God's pleasure in eternity and in view of display in the world to come as this section indicates, but the time when the growth takes place is now; therefore there is need now to be committed in every way to such divine operations.  I believe the Lord would have us to appreciate God's workmanship more.  Of course, the
{2}
Lord would help us to be faithful in every relation of life, home, business, all these things.  These things are all testimonial, God helps us in all these things, but what really matters is God's workmanship.  We as believers are the subjects of this wonderful operation of divine love.  In the world around we might become too much occupied with all that men are doing, but what really matters is what God is doing.  "For we are his workmanship, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works".  It works out testimonially, people can take account of the works who may not know the secret.  Some of us can take account of the life of our brother as knowing the secret of it.  It was God's workmanship.  He was never more appreciated, never more loved than now, but One has loved him more than we do, and has appreciated him more than we do, and He has taken him to be with Himself.  The good works were seen amongst us and no doubt seen too in his movements amongst men, "good works, which God has before prepared that we should walk in them".  These good works were seen perfectly in the Lord Jesus here, and God's workmanship is after that pattern.  It is new creation, created in Christ Jesus, in that Man and after the pattern of that Man.  In the light of this we are prepared to sacrifice certain things here.  As believers we have to forego certain things, but what compensation there is in being God's workmanship.  God wants to have us absolutely for His pleasure eternally, in every way suited to Him because it is His own workmanship in Christ Jesus and after the pattern of that Man.  May every one of our hearts be encouraged until He come, and may we be prepared for the promotion in ourselves of this workmanship, submitting to be hand of the Operator.  There is the word in Jeremiah about the potter and the clay.  He made another vessel as it seemed good to the potter to make it, and that is God's workmanship.  We need to be submissive and pliable in His hand that what He has in mind may result with each one of us and may it be our privilege to appreciate God's workmanship in one another.  May the Lord help and comfort each one.
Edinburgh
18th September 1972
At a burial meeting - previously unpublished
{3}
FORMATION OF DEPTH IN OUR SOULS
@1 Samuel 30:1-8; @2 Samuel 12:14-23; @2 Samuel 12:15:25; @2 Samuel 12:30; @2 Samuel 12:32
We get much interesting detail in the scriptures as to David's history and experiences and the circumstances through which he passed.  There is great variety, and in some instances David rises to a beautiful type of the Lord Jesus; at other times David fails and he sins and is more a type of a believer.  Nevertheless he is genuine and he has depth.
David was God's anointed, as we know.  He was God's selected and is typical of Christ in that setting.  He was anointed three times.  First of all in the midst of his brethren, followed by years of suffering and reproach.  The Lord was anointed at the Jordan in view of service and in view of suffering, in view of His death and what He would accomplish then.  Then David was anointed over Judah in Hebron where he reigned for seven and a half years.  Then he was anointed when all the tribes came to Hebron to make him king.  The Lord Jesus is spoken of as anointed with the oil of gladness above His companions.  This is not in view of suffering but is in view of joy and in view of bringing joy to the heart of God.
The experience at Ziklag was very sorrowful for David and for his men because a great disaster had happened.  David was greatly distressed.  Just think of what these circumstances were through which he passed with the people so embittered that they spoke of stoning him!  But what we learn from this passage is the depth there was in David.  He goes through the most bitter experience here; he must have gone right down to the bottom in this experience.  Then it says "David strengthened himself in Jehovah his God."  He had gone right down to the bottom but now he strengthens himself in Jehovah his God.  Then things begin to happen.  We speak sometimes of touching the bottom in repentance but we are tested as to what depth there is with us.
In each of the instances read, David was responsible for the situation.  We know what calamity is and what sorrows are.  I used to think that the sorrows that have happened amongst us are unparalleled in history because we have brought much of the reproach upon ourselves.  Think of the public reproach which we have to face!  Are we not humbled that we were responsible for it ourselves?  It is not exactly the reproach of Christ.  The reproach of Christ is the normal Christian
{4}
position.  The Lord Jesus said that He was hated without a cause (John 15:25) but when we face facts at the moment some of us could not say that.  We are certainly under reproach and we are to blame for a large part of it because we had not represented the reproach of Christ and we departed from the Christian way.  In certain conduct that went on among us and by our attitude towards others we are responsible ourselves for much of the reproach.  In all these instances David was responsible for the disaster and for the reproach.  He had given occasion for the enemies of Jehovah to blaspheme, 2 Sam 12:14.  We have given cause for persons to reproach us and that causes sorrow.  David was responsible here because he and his men had been amongst the Philistines.  He had gone to Gath, allied himself with the king there and in fact he had been prepared to go with the Philistines against the people of God.  It is true he had been prevented from doing so but he had been prepared to go as far as that.  So he would feel he was to blame for the calamity, but what you find is that in the discipline of it there was depth formed in his soul.  He faced it all, he was distressed about it, then he strengthened himself in Jehovah.  It brings out to me the depth there was in David and there will not be depth with us, dear brethren, without facing the responsibility for much of the reproach that has come upon us.  No doubt David here had faced the whole situation; he would go over the whole history, why he had fled from Saul and allied himself with Achish, king of Gath, and why he was so involved with the Philistines.  He would go over all this in the presence of God and find the root of it all.  What do we know about this?  We are to know something of it.  No doubt David searched his motives as to why he had got into such a position and as doing so depth was formed in him.  Luke's gospel speaks about the man who dug and went deep (@Luke 6:47), not simply that he dug deep but dug and went deep.  That is what happened to David, he went deep and as a result you see a fully recovered man.  Then things begin to happen: he is like the righteous man who "falleth seven times, and riseth up again", @Proverbs 24:16.  He strengthened himself in Jehovah his God -- it is something inward -- a strengthening in his own personal knowledge of God and it produced inward strength.  No doubt it involved (speaking in Christian language) the presence and activity of the Holy Spirit.  No doubt he had previously grieved the Spirit but now he strengthened himself and enquires of Jehovah.  From this point there is recovery and from the position of being guilty and responsible he rises to be a type of Christ
{5}
and recovers all.  It shows what is possible, beloved, as we face things and depth is formed in our souls.
Now 2 Samuel 12 follows the grievous sin of which David was guilty in regard of Bathsheba and Urijah.  You say 'the same David who had learned depth in his soul, who had known what it was to be with God and God with him?'.  Yes: what a sin he sinks into, guilty as to the death of Urijah and in relation to Bathsheba.  What a scheming man he became!  What a politician!  What a sin he sinks into, scheming with Joab for the death of faithful Urijah!  How serious it was and here again David was responsible.  He is under God's hand in discipline: God says that the child shall certainly die.  Does David say 'Well, that is going to happen; I cannot do anything about it'?  No, he goes through the experience with God.  If he had been a superficial believer, he might have just resigned himself to God's action and said, 'the child will certainly die, and that will be that'.  But David does not do so; instead he besought God for the child.  You see, he has depth and affection in his soul and he fasted.  He ought to have fasted in chapter 11 and gone with the army when the conflict was on, but God does not say he was too late to fast now.  He respects David's fast.  David confessed his sins and God had regard to him.  So he goes through the exercise even though the elders of his house do not understand what is going on.  He fasted and lay all night on the earth.  The elders did not understand the depth of repentance; they must have been superficial persons, yet David goes on day after day, for seven days.  When the child died the exercise was over, but when there was life David went on with the exercise at cost to himself.  The elders feared to say when the child was dead.  What one may go through in the depth of his soul is mysterious to the superficial mind.  Dear brethren, we need to know something about this.  If we are to be truly recovered persons, truly revived persons, we need to know something of going through these things with God.  Misunderstood by many, David still goes through the matter.  In the next verse you find that a child is born of these same parents and Jehovah sends by the hand of Nathan the prophet and called his name Jedidiah, meaning the child is loved of Jehovah.  What a result from David's exercises; you can hardly understand it!  But surely it is the result of depth in David's soul.  Such is the divine way.  Superficial persons can somersault overnight -- that does not denote depth.  David goes through exercise in a deep way and the result was for the pleasure and glory of God.  So David went into the house of Jehovah and worshipped.  What a result from the
{6}
discipline through which he passed!  We may often face much in the way of discipline and the Lord does discipline us.  Some of our dear brethren know it more than others and we all ought to be with them in the experience of it.  How many have lost parents, families, children!  God would use this for our discipline, that we might go through it with God and in result be able to go into His house and worship as David did.  There are to be results from all we have been through and go through, for the pleasure and glory of God.
In the third scripture, we have David and those with him in public reproach.  Jerusalem is taken over by Absalom and David has to flee.  Think of the public reproach, the shame of it, that David the rightful king flees when Absalom takes over.  Alas, again, David is responsible; he had unrighteously reinstated Absalom and the consequence was that this rebellion took place.  Oh, do we feel responsible for the public reproach that has come in on the testimony!  Once again this is not exactly the reproach of Christ; it is like the reproach due to our own misdeeds and our failures and our being caught up in wrong things.  So David is responsible but see how he acts!  He says to Zadok, "Carry back the ark of God into the city.  If I shall find favour in the eyes of Jehovah, he will bring me again, and show me it, and its habitation".  It is a man in whom there is some depth of soul.  He sends back the ark, and Zadok, Abiathar and others go with it too, in the very city controlled by Absalom.  The ark is there, and the priests, and the sons.  There was a spot in Jerusalem where the ark was and had you been in its habitation you would not have known there was a rebellion.  It is what God has secretly in the midst of the public confusion.  We see publicly the confusion complete but in the midst of it all there is a spot where the ark is and where the priests are and the service of God goes on.  David had to face the public position but his heart was where the ark of God was, and his longing was that he might be back where the ark was.  Meanwhile he faces the public reproach.  He, the true king is in rejection and those with him were in rejection too, going where they might; such is the public position.  David goes up by the ascent of the Olives, weeping with his head covered and barefoot.  He is feeling the reproach of the whole position and those with him are moving likewise.  Yet when he comes to the summit he worshipped God!  We would desire to be able to move like this, in some way at least.  What we go through should result in a deepening with us.  We might say that we were led away but we cannot blame anybody but ourselves.  It was lack of depth
{7}
with us that we were so readily carried away by certain things; we were too superficial.  But as depth was found here in David's soul, so it is to be found in our souls.  We learn thereby to consider for God and to be with God and to know something of God being with us.  "Jehovah is with you while ye are with him" said the Spirit of God through Azariah, 2 Chron 15:2.  The great need is to be with God and with the Lord.  We often pray that the Lord might be with us; that is good too but the important thing is that we should be with the Lord.  David came to be with God in all these instances we have read; in the disaster at Ziklag, in his exercise over God's dealings in relation to his sin, then in this matter of the rebellion.  He arrived at this point in his soul by facing things in depth and the Lord means, I am sure, that we should deepen in our knowledge of Himself.  As we do so we shall deepen in our feelings for Him and for one another, and we shall be increasingly knit together and more fully committed to the service of God.
May it be so, for the Lord's Name's sake.
Malvern
27th January 1973
{8}
COMMITTAL TO THE WILL OF GOD
@Luke 22:39-46; @Genesis 40:14; @Genesis 40:23; @2 Samuel 17:15-18 (first part); @Esther 2:21-23
I desire to speak about how at times certain responsibility falls upon us: certain matters involving the will of God may lie on any one of us to do.  If we are faithful God can use us in a certain situation.
We need to see that, while God works out His purpose and His counsel, He is never disappointed and He is never taken by surprise.  We were speaking last night about one of the names of God being The Same; no matter what comes in, no matter how the enemy attacks, God is never surprised, He is never taken aback, He is never disappointed and everything will go through according to His mind.  God is never diverted by what happens; He always has the initiative and proceeds with it in spite of anything that might come in to hinder.  Now that is God's side of every matter.  Along with that there is our side.  At some time any one of us might find himself or herself in a position where something depends on that one to do, and God would count on such a one to act rightly in those circumstances.  What I have to say ought to encourage anyone who finds himself or herself in a certain situation.  The test is whether in that situation I am going to be committed to the will of God or whether I am going to fail Him.
Now we begin with Luke 22 because we find the Lord Jesus Himself in a certain situation.  We find Him in a situation, dear brethren, where everything depends on Him -- everything.  The weight of responsibility on the Lord Jesus in this section who could estimate?  The whole matter of the will of God, the whole purpose of God and all His counsel, all His plans depended on the Lord Jesus in this situation in which He was.  We could not of course think of the Lord Jesus failing and yet we are to admire, we are to adore our Saviour who was in this position where everything for the glory of God and everything for the blessing of man depended on Him.  So it says, "he was withdrawn from them about a stone's throw, and having knelt down he prayed".  Think of the perfect dependent manhood of Jesus!  He is presented here as the dependent One who counted on His God.  What a faithful Servant He was!  We need hardly say that, we all know He was, and yet to view
{9}
Him in this situation would encourage any one who finds himself in any position of responsibility.  What responsibilities lay on the Lord Jesus at this moment.
He is facing death, He is facing the bearing of the judgment of God, He is facing being forsaken.  Satan is bringing his power to bear against Him.  Think of the Lord Jesus in that situation, and He is there in perfection.  He was a real Man and yet God's purpose was as safe in the hands of the Lord Jesus at this moment as it ever was.  All that God had planned for the maintenance of His own glory and for the blessing of every person in every family which has been secured and will yet be secured depended on the Lord Jesus at this moment.  He was facing the matter of God's will.  "Having knelt down he prayed, saying, Father, if thou wilt remove this cup from me".  The Lord Jesus is in perfection shrinking from what faced Him.  We all know what it is to shrink from what faces us in certain situations but that would not be perfection, but it was perfection in the Lord Jesus.  Who He was, the kind of Man He was must necessarily shrink from what faced Him.  And yet would He flinch?  He said, "but then, not my will, but thine be done".  Then it says, "an angel appeared to him from heaven strengthening him".  Think of the Lord needing strengthening at this moment.  It shows, dear brethren, the reality of His manhood.  He was a real Man here and the whole responsibility of carrying through the will of God depended on Him.  I say again, God's purpose, God's plans were as safe in the hands of Jesus at that moment as when these plans were made or at any moment in the history of eternity and time, all God's purposes were as safe in the hands of the Saviour in Gethsemane as ever they were.  What a perfect Man He is, what a model for us, what a subject for our contemplation, our adoration!  This would give us strength: to see the Lord Jesus in the perfection of His dependent manhood facing a situation where everything depended on Him.  It would strengthen us to face some little situation, some little difficulty that confronts any one of us at any time.  You can see the intenseness of the conflict here: "an angel appeared to him from heaven strengthening him.  And being in conflict he prayed more intently.  And his sweat became as great drops of blood, falling down".  This is manhood in perfection.  This is manhood in conflict such as we shall never know, the depth of which we shall never know, for it is our Lord and Master in conflict here.  Then it says, "rising up from his prayer" -- rising up from the depth of conflict, rising up from that depth of anguish in which He was involved in Gethsemane, "rising up
{10}
from his prayer, coming to the disciples, he found them sleeping from grief".  Oh what a model we have, dear brethren, what a Man, what a blessed, perfect, dependent Man that we need to get our eye on and keep our eye on to encourage us to face any situation whatsoever!  We need to be formed in this kind of manhood, and we will be as we contemplate the Man we desire to be formed after, and the Spirit will help us in that formation.  There is a need at the moment for manhood of this kind.  We were speaking in the reading in 2 Peter 1 as to certain features: "in your faith have also virtue"; these features are features of manhood according to God.  Think of what virtue there was with Jesus here!  Was there not faith?  Was there not virtue in His faith?  Was there not courage when He rose up from His prayer and moved forward to be the victim, to undertake all that the will of God involved at infinite cost to Himself -- rising up from His prayer He proceeded!  What a blessed theme of contemplation we have in the Lord Jesus!
Now we come to this incident in the book of Genesis.  The situation spoken of here involved this cup-bearer.  He had received certain benefits from Joseph, he knew Joseph, Joseph interpreted his dream and encouraged him.  Joseph gave him a message of peace and you might say he was the means of preaching the gospel to him.  Joseph gave that man glad tidings which he was glad to receive.  And Joseph asked one thing from this man, just one thing.  He said, "Only bear a remembrance with thee of me when it goes well with thee".  He makes a request: Joseph says in effect, 'I have preached the gospel to you, you are going to be liberated; you had a vine before you, your head is going to be lifted up and you will be restored to your office'.  That was glad tidings for this cup-bearer because he was troubled.  Joseph says, "Only bear a remembrance with thee of me when it goes well with thee... and make mention of me to Pharaoh".  Had not this cup-bearer reason to have Joseph in his heart and to look for an opportunity to bring Joseph in?  Have we not reason to, dear brethren?  Have we not reason to think of the Lord Jesus and all He has accomplished for us?  Have we not reason to look for opportunities to bring Him in?  Instead of that it says, "the chief of the cup-bearers did not remember Joseph, and forgot him".  That is our frailty, our weakness, our self-occupation, our self-interest.  Instead of looking for opportunities to bring him in, the cup-bearer did not remember him and forgot him.  How ungrateful!  Can we put ourselves in that position?  Can we see how ungrateful we have been?  Have we not arrived at how unfaithful we have been?
{11}
Now, this cup-bearer was the necessary link between the situation which arose and the introduction of Joseph.  Joseph was unknown and it was the cup­bearer who eventually was the link, who was the means of introducing Joseph to the critical situation which arose in the next chapter.  Pharaoh dreamed a dream and there was no one to interpret it; and as far as Egypt was concerned no one knew about Joseph except the cup-bearer who ought to have been the link but he did not remember Joseph and forgot him.  But he comes to it; he comes to it in repentance.  When the situation arose and there was no interpreter, this chief of the cup-bearers remembered about Joseph and was the means of introducing Joseph into the critical situation.  How valuable to know the true Joseph in this day, the interpreter, the One who makes all things clear!  We were speaking about the Lord Jesus as Head, source of wisdom, love and power.  There may arise locally a situation where there is need to bring in Christ.  We read, "Then spoke the chief of the cup-bearers to Pharaoh, saying, I remember mine offences this day".  He becomes the means of introducing Joseph who takes over the whole situation.  Instead of calamity he takes over the whole matter, explains it all, and takes charge of it all, and becomes the great administrator of food in the land of Egypt.  He explained about the seven years of plenty and the seven years of famine.  I have no doubt we have had seven years of plenty in the history of the testimony in the ministries, and we are now in the seven years of famine, but whether you are in the seven years of famine or the seven years of plenty makes no difference if you know Joseph.  There was as much available under Joseph in the years of famine as there was in the years of plenty.  The fact is the famine became the means of bringing Joseph into pre-eminence.  As long as there were seven years of plenty Joseph was the administrator and he laid up the grain, but he became indispensable when the years of famine came and the word was, "Go to Joseph" .  The cup-bearer seems a very flimsy and very slender link, and yet through repentance he became the means of the introduction of Joseph to the whole situation and the whole situation changed.  He was not like our Lord and Master in Luke 22, he was not marked by perfection, very far from it.  Two full years elapsed before a situation arose when he remembered about Joseph.  It reminds us of our own frailty, our own unfaithfulness, how unfaithful we have been, and yet a certain situation has arisen in which we can have some part, and we are privileged to have some part, in the introduction of the true Joseph.
{12}
In 2 Samuel we can see that being in a certain situation where the will of God is involved does not necessarily depend on age or experience because here a maid is a link.  It is "the maid" whoever she was, some unnamed young sister who becomes the link between Hushai and David.  There was need for a link there to fill its place and it was seen in this little maid.  There was a little community with the ark in Jerusalem, secretly, where Absalom reigned publicly, and the link between that community with the ark in Jerusalem and David in rejection was the maid.  It says that Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by En-rogel for they might not be seen to come into the city.  This has been spoken of as a kind of secret service; secret things are going on about which the enemy knows nothing.  It is always a comfort to realise that the enemy, Satan, is a creature and has certain limitations.  He is not almighty, he does not know everything.  There are certain things he has not the capacity to understand or appreciate.  Think of Job for instance.  All Satan could see about Job were his circumstances and his possessions and his health.  He did not know what reserves God had in Job.  Therefore Satan acts in the circumstances thinking that that is all that matters, but there was depth in Job which came to light and which Satan had not the capacity to appreciate.  The mysterious links in affection that the saints have together Satan does not understand.  The work of God in the believer Satan does not understand and does not have the capacity to appreciate.  Now that is a great comfort.  He knows what we are in the flesh because he has had a hand in producing that.  It was the poison of the serpent instilled in to Adam and his wife that has marked the whole race.  He understands that all right.
He understands how the flesh reacts to certain situations, but he has not the capacity to understand the work of God, and motives and desires according to God.  Therefore there are certain secret things that proceed that Satan does not have the capacity to understand or appreciate, and that is always a great comfort to have before us.  So there is a certain secret order of things in Jerusalem that Absalom knew nothing about, and that secret order of things in a few in Jerusalem was a means of the overthrowing of the whole Absalom power.  A link was necessary in this chain and a little maid was that link -- a young person.  Hushai needed to send this message to David, Hushai was in Jerusalem, one of this little community we were speaking about, and David was in rejection, and the priests' sons, Jonathan and Ahimaaz, stayed by En-rogel, they might not be seen in the city; but the maid took the message,
{13}
the maid formed that link.  Now dear young believer whoever you may be, I would like to encourage you to be committed to the will of God, to be committed to what is right, to be committed to the promotion of the Lord's interests here.  Things may look dark and confused but I would like to encourage every young person here to have some part in the Lord's interests at the present time of whom the maid is an example.
Now I have only a few words to say about the book of Esther.  It is a very interesting history.  Mordecai is found sitting at the king's gate, that is, to use Christian language, he was standing by the rights of Christ.  Whatever happened, Mordecai sat at the king's gate, he was faithful there.  Two men sought to lay hand on king Ahasuerus, and because Mordecai was sitting at the king's gate he learned of it and he told Esther the queen, and she told the king in Mordecai's name, and the matter was investigated and found out and they were hanged on a tree, "And it was written in the book of the chronicles before the king".  That little statement is of all importance: "it was written in the book of the chronicles before the king".  It forms an important link in this book.  Then it was forgotten about.  There is a certain lapse of time: the first verse of the next chapter says, "After these things king Ahasuerus promoted Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his seat above all the princes that were with him".  But before Haman the enemy of the people of God is established, this regarding Mordecai was written in the book of the chronicles before the king.  The fact that this was written in the book of the chronicles before the king became the means of the overthrow of the whole Haman system.  It seems to be a little incident, and it was forgotten about, but if you read the history you will find that it is afterwards referred to.  I have heard this book spoken of as a drama, but it is real life.  It is not a drama out of any man's imagination, it is a drama which actually happened, and many things like this have happened in the history of the testimony.  Haman is promoted, and Haman has his way; you would think that Haman is just going to remove the Jews from the face of the earth, so much power is given to him, but before he is advanced a certain thing was written in the book of the chronicles before the king.  Haman made the gallows fifty cubits high.  Who were the gallows for?  For Mordecai who sat at the king's gate.  Who was hanged on the gallows?  Haman who made the gallows.  How did it come about?  Because the king could not sleep and he sent for the chronicles and he read about Mordecai.  He said, "What honour and dignity has been done to Mordecai for this?"  It
{14}
became the whole turning point in the history.  I want to point out that some little incident that might appear insignificant, where somebody is faithful, becomes the means that God uses to overthrow the power of the enemy.
I think all this should encourage us.  No incident is too small, no expression of faithfulness to God is too small.  God takes account of every one of them.  You may remember that the Lord said regarding His disciples, "ye are they who have persevered with me in my temptations", @Luke 22:28.  Let us be like Mordecai, be committed to sitting at the king's gate.  Let us be jealous for the Lord's rights in His absence.  Who is jealous to provide conditions suitable to Him down here in localities?  The Holy Spirit is.  I say without hesitation, the Holy Spirit is committed to the maintenance of the Lord's Name and the Lord's pleasure here in His absence, and He will encourage and help us to fill out the part that belongs to each one of us in the history of the testimony while we are still here.  May the Lord help every one of us.
Brooklyn NY
12th May 1973
{15}
PROVING OUR REALITY
@2 Peter 1:5-11; @Colossians 1:21-23; @Hebrews 3:5,6; @Hebrews 3:14
J.R.  These scriptures would support the view that we are constantly being tested and challenged, and there is a need continually to prove our reality.  Tests and difficulties are meant to be a means of proving our reality; the onus is on us therefore to make our calling and election sure.  It is a remarkable expression.  You might think that election is sure enough; no matter what we do or how we behave, things will be all right in the end.  That is not how Scripture presents things; we are to make our calling and election sure, that is, we are to manifest that we are called and elected and to prove it continually.  This requires diligence; verse 5 says, "using therewith all diligence", also v 10, "use diligence".  2 Peter 2 contemplates a condition of things that leads to apostasy and that tide is flowing strongly in our days; therefore there is a need to use all diligence that in our faith we have, also virtue, in virtue knowledge, and so on.  In Colossians we have the same idea.  The Colossians are addressed as "holy and faithful brethren in Christ", yet it says in verse 23, "if indeed ye abide in the faith founded and firm, and not moved away from the hope of the glad tidings".  You see, an 'if' comes in there.  This would encourage the Colossians to prove that they were real.  Now in Hebrews we have a similar idea: "Whose house are we, if indeed we hold fast the boldness and the boast of hope firm to the end".  Then he says, "For we are become companions of the Christ if indeed we hold the beginning of the assurance firm to the end".  Therefore we prove our reality by continuance.  Is that clear?
A.B.P.  And challenging too.
J.R.  Yes, I think it would challenge each one of us.  To be found proving our reality involves using diligence.  If we give up or become easy and un­interested we will be caught in a strong tide that is flowing.  Hebrews speaks about slipping away; "lest in any way we should slip away", chap 2:1.  It is not a wilful thing exactly; it is just that you are caught in a strong current.  Now to enable us to prove our reality we have to use all diligence.  It is like the fish that were clean that had fins and scales which could go against the stream (@Leviticus 11:9).  It speaks about "using... all
{16}
diligence" to have certain things in certain other things, that is, "in your faith have also virtue, in virtue knowledge...".
E.E.H.  I like your calling our attention to this word 'if': it is very important.  The Lord says in @Matthew 10:22, "he that has endured to the end, he shall be saved".  Salvation is secure in Christ but "he that has endured to the end, he shall be saved".
{17}
J.R.  That is very important; and it would encourage us to continue to the end.  Continuance needs diligence; it is like a marathon race not a short sprint; it is a long-term matter.
E.E.H.  It requires endurance.
G.D.W.  Would this 'if' follow the one of @2 Timothy 2:21, "If therefore one shall have purified himself from these, in separating himself from them, he shall be a vessel to honour, sanctified, serviceable to the Master"?
J.R.  Yes; it says, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity".  That is an obligation on every believer.  So it says, "If therefore one shall have purified himself from these", referring to vessels to dishonour.  We thus prove our reality as naming the Name of the Lord.  We can name the Name of the Lord and not be proving our reality.  This does not mean that persons who do not prove their reality are not real; there are many believers who are not on the line of using diligence to prove their reality: nevertheless we know they are real.  Some are slipping away, giving up things, even features of the truth; I am not saying they are not real: "The Lord knows those that are his".  The Lord knows every one who is real but "Let every one who names the name of the Lord" (that is every professing believer) "withdraw from iniquity" and purify himself from vessels to dishonour.
E.T.M.  I wondered whether this attitude on our part would point up the necessity for the divine presence and provide the wherewithal to ensure the divine presence with us as we go through?  What is intended to be worked out in us was seen in the Lord personally pre-eminently; and He made a point of that, that the Father had not left Him alone because He did always the things that pleased the Father.  I wondered whether that is the standard and whether that would help us to commit ourselves to be in this attitude of mind.
J.R.  That is very important.
R.L.  Daniel was a young man who purposed in his heart and could say "prove us", and he was one who continued.
J.R.  That is very fine.  He purposed in his heart not to be defiled, he was proving his reality.  Not only did he purpose in his heart not to be defiled but he prescribed what he ought to be given -- pulse and water.  He knew what would build him up in his constitution, so that he continued.  The secret of Daniel purposing in his heart not to be defiled with the king's delicate food comes out in chapter 6 where it says that his windows were open toward Jerusalem.
W.F.  Do you think we have to be very careful not to fall into 'exclusivism', although I very much agree with what you are saying?
J.R.  Yes, we need to see that what we go on with belongs to every believer.  It is not an exclusive privilege that a few claim -- in fact we can claim nothing.  What we go on with is proper to every real believer.  There are many (and we are thankful for every one who is converted, no matter by what means) but the Lord would speak to each one of us that we might be proving our reality continually.
W.F.  Yes, I agree with you.
J.R.  We certainly have ample reason to be humble; we have been humiliated and humbled.  We have received the Lord's public rebuke as to what we were going on with for years; therefore it becomes us to claim nothing.
G.H.  Would Daniel purposing in his heart not to pollute himself with the king's delicate food bring out the moral side?  It is not in his mind but his heart, showing that his heart was right.
J.R.  That is right.  Nebuchadnezzar and his empire and all the university training that Daniel and his companions were committed to by the emperor did not influence him.  In spite of it all he used diligence.  The onus is on us in that sense.  It says, "in your faith have also virtue".  It is not exactly adding to your faith virtue but "in your faith have also virtue" -- have virtue in your faith; that is that our faith is not to be merely a profession but is to be real; and virtue involves, I understand, the idea of courage.  Faith is not just a profession but it becomes active.  James says that faith without works is dead, chap 2:20.  "In your faith have also virtue"; it is that feature which makes faith living and active.
{18}
G.D.P.  Does the psalmist prove his reality when he says, "If I forget thee, Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its skill; if I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to my palate; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy", @Psalm 137:5,6?
J.R.  Yes.
L.MacF.  In regard of Daniel again, reality came out in his countenance.  It is not a question of what we are assuming; the thing was there to be seen.  The king had to take account of it that these persons were fairer and fatter than all in Babylon.
J.R.  That was not profession; that was reality.  He would not look fairer, and certainly would not look fatter, on profession, would he?  It is a constitutional thing.
L.MacF.  So Timothy is exhorted to pursue a certain line which is in view -- "Strive diligently to present thyself", 2 Tim 2:15.
G.D.W.  Daniel says, "And whilst I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before Jehovah..." chap 9:20.  As a result he gets the word of God.
J.R.  Quite so.  He gets divine communications.
J.A.P.  Would the reference to Lot in this very epistle show that Peter was not passing over someone who was real but was not exercising his faith?  That would encourage us not to forget many who are real but not in the exercise of faith.
J.R.  We ought to be increasingly thankful that there are many believers in the world but, along with that, we are to be exercised and use diligence to prove our reality.  That does not mean to say that others are not real, but the onus is on each one of us to make our calling and election sure, or manifest.
A.B.P.  Would the items that are referred to here -- "in your faith have also virtue, in virtue knowledge", etc -- be the deepening of the work of God in us developing the inward man?  It is not just adding one thing to another but that in the one thing, taken on rightly in exercise, there develops something else.  So that it reaches the point that in brotherly love we have love: I presume that is the highest idea of love.
{19}
J.R.  It seems like that.  I like what you are saying about this deepening in the inward man.  We begin in @Romans 7:22, "For I delight in the law of God according to the inward man".  Then we have in @2 Corinthians 4 that the outward man is consumed but the inward is renewed day by day, v 16.  These features -- faith, virtue, knowledge, and so on -- are features of manhood according to God in which we need to develop to make our calling and election sure.  It is not a matter of profession and claiming things but of deepening in manhood according to God, after the pattern of Christ, as Mr Maynard says.
A.B.P.  So the sureness of the matter would reflect in our consciousness of getting into the divine presence and having a link with God when we pray.
J.R.  That is very important as linked with reality.  In Matthew 6 the Lord says, "when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret, and thy Father who sees in secret...", v 6.  It is an inward and secret matter.  These things are basic but they are very important.
C.C.G.  In the end of Luke, after the Lord had gone up on high, those He left came back to Jerusalem and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God.  Would that be a connection with what you had in mind?
J.R.  That is right: praising and blessing God is a fine occupation.  The enemy would stop it by his attacks but using diligence is essential to maintain it.
A.B.P.  They continued steadfastly.
J.R.  Yes, or persevered.  It involves manhood and the feature of endurance which is to be "in temperance".
B.T.  When persons come in to analyse a business they see various names and titles on paper.  What they ask is, Is he active?  It speaks here of being neither idle nor unfruitful.
J.R.  We are not to be sleeping partners; if we are, we will slip away.  There is plenty of work to be done and we are to know that our work is not in vain in the Lord, @1 Corinthians 15:58.
{20}
R.L.  It is put simply here.  Peter says, Let the thing be operative, let the thing be functioning with us.  If the thing is functioning it will be manifest.
J.R.  Exactly; and each one is to be in this.  This matter of having one thing in another thing, and depth and what is inward, is very important.  "In your faith have also virtue": that is your faith becomes active and living because you use diligence to have virtue in it.  We speak about active faith.  "In virtue knowledge, in knowledge temperance, in temperance endurance, in endurance godliness": these are features we have tended to lose sight of.  How important godliness is -- to have godly exercise!  We could criticise and find fault with things, and may be right enough in the faults we find, but what about godly exercise?  What about committing ourselves to helping in such a situation?
E.T.M.  Verse 8 is very important.  I can see the wisdom of stressing that all the Lord's people are real, but the distinction of being real and expressing reality must be recognised.  So it says, "for these things existing and abounding", not just existing but abounding would be an expression that the thing is there.  I am thinking of what they said to David, "Thine are we, David" (1 Chron 12:18), that goes for every saint on earth; but he says, "And with thee, thou son of Jesse"; that is the distinction we are trying to make.  The "with thee" is the test, is it not?
J.R.  That is it, we tend to be content with a certain participation whereas it involves our whole committal.
E.T.M.  The enemy would readily use any assertion but this distinction is to be made plain.  As you said, we are not claiming anything, but what Daniel pursued -- the confessing of his sins and the sins of his fathers -- is diametrically opposite to an exclusive claim, and that has to be recognised.
J.R.  Exactly.  We always spoke of having part in the breakdown, but really we were somewhat detached from it; we thought that others had failed.  But now we have to face the fact that we have all been involved in the breakdown, and we have all in fact, more or less, promoted the breakdown; therefore we ought to feel more deeply with God about the public breakdown, and the discipline of that ought to help us in our spirits and produce some depth that maybe could not have been produced otherwise.
{21}
E.T.M.  So you find the necessity for insisting on this not only in public prayers but in private prayers, that you have been part of it.  But that is not the end; recovery and the deepening of the work of God in us, involving substance to carry on, is what we are after.
J.R.  It is meant to lead to being more committed than ever with diligence to apply ourselves to these things that Peter speaks about.
D.T.H.  This epistle is not addressed to any company but to individual Christians, is it not?  Does that help to bring it down to each one of us rather than to a company.  Some of us may feel we are in a certain company and we can drift along with the tide.
J.R.  The company is just what the individuals are who compose it.  We have to face tests and apply ourselves individually, and we have found one another as individuals having right exercises and following right principles.  We are not just drifting on as belonging to a position.  It is a question of being individually disciples of the Lord Jesus and individually using diligence to prove our reality.  If my objective is to prove my reality, I am not claiming anything, and I will meet somebody else who is on the same line and we will be together in the proving of our reality.  Do you think so?
D.T.H.  Yes, if we held to that it would preserve us from making exclusive claims.
J.R.  We ought to desire to represent what is proper to every believer.
D.T.H.  Yes, you would trust that that would be the outlook of each one.
J.R.  Each one of us ought to be set to represent what every believer should be.
F.N.S.  The ground we take, if we can use that expression, is the only proper ground that every Christian should take.  So in 2 Timothy 2, in days of breakdown, the foundation of God stands but it has two sides to the seal, and this puts obligation on every believer.  It is encouraging that there are some to go on with, is it not?
J.R.  That is right.  2 Timothy is an exhortation to every professing believer: "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity".  Every professing believer is obligated to withdraw from iniquity and by doing so he proves his reality.  Now if he does not do so I am not saying he is not real.  "The Lord knows those that are his" and
{22}
the loaf at the Supper reminds us of this every Lord's day morning.  Every believer who has the Spirit is part of that loaf and we are to recognise that, but the onus is on every professing believer to withdraw from iniquity.
H.C.MacG.  Would that connect with the right -- they who wash their robes have a right, Rev 22:14?
J.R.  "Blessed are they that wash their robes", that is a continual process; it is not a once and for all matter any more than withdrawing from iniquity is a once and for all matter; it is to be maintained.
A.B.P.  Do you not think that there has been enhanced in recent exercises the fact that out of the side of Jesus came blood and water?  John stresses the matter of the water; we may be inclined to overlook it.  But I think that recent exercises have stressed the need for the water.  The priest could not go into the sanctuary if he did not use the blood and the water.
J.R.  Is there not a certain stress on the continuance of the use of the  water -- the laver  for  instance?  It is a daily matter.  Is not the water what we make use of?
A.B.P.  Yes.  The efficacy is in the ashes of the red heifer, the result of the terrible burning that took place (Num 19); and its blood was sprinkled seven times before the entrance to the tent of meeting.  I think that the Lord is stressing in our day, despite a strong trend against it, the urgent need for water.
J.R.  So the severity of judgment in Numbers 19 came upon persons not because they became defiled but because they did not use the water of purification, v 13.  We all become defiled but we are to make use continually of the water of purification which is always available.
A.B.P.  I think that is a very vital matter because Scripture clearly indicates that we can inadvertently become unclean, but the point is that once we realise our uncleanness our responsibility is to use the water.
J.A.P.  Another reference in that regard is the heifer in @Deuteronomy 21:4; it says that the heifer shall be brought unto an ever flowing watercourse, v 4.  Is it a reference to the Spirit?
J.R.  I think so.  The Spirit, the water and the blood are connected in John's epistle, @1 John 5:8.  They bear witness and the witness is one.
{23}
A.B.P.  The scripture that Mr Petersen refers to is very helpful because it is not water in a vessel -- it is not the extent to which I may have the Spirit -- but it is the fresh movements of the Spirit Himself that are recognised.
J.A.P.  It was a very difficult matter that had to be met there.  Do we not have to get to the Lord Jesus and to the Holy Spirit about these difficult matters?
J.R.  I am sure that is right.  Is not the matter in the hands of the priests eventually?
A.B.P.  They are the sons of Levi; not simply priests in a locality but of the priestly family.
J.R.  That would be, in New Testament language, spiritual persons.  That would be persons who have the Spirit and are controlled by the Spirit.
A.B.P.  "Ye who are spiritual", @Galatians 6:1.
G.D.W.  Referring again to your remarks on reality, in Laodicea it says, Thou knowest not certain things, Rev 3:17.  In other words they did not prove reality.  But then they are counselled to buy gold purified by fire.  Would there be something enduring in that, something to get free from and something to come into?
J.R.  That is so, and at the end of that address the Lord says, "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking; if any one hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me", v 20.  Would not such a person be proving his reality?  One who does not open the door might still be real, the Lord knows that, but we are to manifest our reality.  Real testimony results because persons are continually proving they are real in the midst of a general Laodicean condition.
E.E.H.  What we have here, these elements that are expressed, are just normal, what is to be found in every believer.  He says, Have it.  We need to have it.
J.R.  That is right.  We would do one another a good service if we remind each other what real Christianity is.  This is normal Christianity.  This is not something extraordinary that some attain to and others cannot; it is open to every one of us.
{24}
G.H.  In quoting @Matthew 6:6, "But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret, and thy Father who sees in secret will render it to thee", did you have in mind reality?
J.R.  Yes.  It is in contrast with the hypocrites who love to stand in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets so that they should appear to men.  But the Lord says, "Thou" (emphatic), "when thou prayest"; such a person is proving his reality.  If anyone here desires to start proving his reality let him go into his chamber and shut the door and speak to his Father; "thy Father" -- it is the believer and his Father.  It is not our Father but his Father, it is the individual side of Christianity, which is a most important thing.
G.H.  The apostle in writing to Timothy uses that expression "but thou".
J.R.  That is very good, because the emphatic "thou" comes in, I think, three times in 2 Timothy.  It is in contrast with the strong current that is going on to apostasy.
A.R.S.  The Thessalonians were marked by "work of faith, and labour of love, and enduring constancy of hope", @1 Thessalonians 1:3.  Do you think that is the idea?
J.R.  That is the idea, and they were new converts.  Paul had been there three sabbath days and preached to them.  They soon proved their reality.  Christianity is very simple when you are newly converted, and when a person knows that he is nearing the very end of his life here he finds Christianity very simple; in between these two points we can become very involved.  Christianity itself is never involved.
R.L.  Would Paul's word to the Philippians be on a similar line as to working out your own salvation with fear and trembling, chap 2:12?  It would preserve us from claiming anything, as you say, but at the same time manifest that we are in salvation.
J.R.  That is right.  That actually refers to a local company working out its own salvation.  With the personnel available they work out something to a result.  There is nothing more testing in a sense than being in a locality working with others; it needs this kind of manhood we are reading of in 2 Peter.  To be one of a local company and work with others we need to have in our faith virtue, in virtue knowledge, in knowledge
{25}
temperance, and so on as this verse indicates.  How much brotherly love is needed, and love.
R.L.  So that the thing is seen collectively, it is where you enjoy the collective expression of it.
J.R.  Exactly, and we are not to be afraid of the collective idea, nor of the local idea.  The gospel has in mind that there should be an expression of things collectively, locally.  In Matthew 26 and Mark 14, where the woman anoints the Lord's head, the Lord says, "Wheresoever"; not 'whensoever' but "wheresoever these glad tidings may be preached", that is the glad tidings preached in a place.  It has in view producing persons of that character.  If you have persons in a place who are proving their reality what do you have?  You have assembly personnel.  Now such persons would not claim to be the assembly but there would be there what answers to local assembly conditions.
R.L.  As you say, we would not claim to be the assembly, for every one who is indwelt by the Spirit belongs to it, but the expression of it is seen in such persons.
J.R.  We ought to be thankful for every believer on the earth who is real, and the Lord knows every one of them.  Along with that we are to be committed to provide assembly conditions for Christ.  The recovery that began with Mr Darby had in view what was collective locally.  The recovery is not to a Pentecostal order of things; the recovery is to Paul's order of things which involves local assemblies.  As a result of Paul's preaching at Corinth and Ephesus and elsewhere there were local assemblies.  He could address the assembly of God which is in Corinth.  We could not do that now, nevertheless we are not to give up the idea of providing local assembly conditions for the heart of the Lord Jesus in His absence.
A.B.P.  John very carefully avoids anything official, does he not?  It is lovely to see how he expresses the local position: "where the disciples were", John 20:19.  What could be simpler than that?  Yet they were disciples and were together, and the doors were shut for fear of the Jews.
W.F.  With that in mind I was wondering what you think of these popular preachers and revival meetings going on.  Many young people have been converted through them.
{26}
J.R.  You are thankful for every one of them.  It is somewhat like what James and John said to the Lord: "We saw some one casting out demons in thy name... and we forbad him".  The Lord said, "Forbid him not...  for he who is not against us is for us", @Mark 9:38-40.  The Lord did not say, Link on with him and help him in his work.  What do you say about that?
W.F.  I think that is very excellent.
J.R.  Much depends on the objective in preaching.  I would like, and I think you would, to preach having the objective to secure persons for the assembly.  Your objective colours your preaching even unconsciously.  If a preacher has the objective to save souls from hell, you are thankful for that, but that objective colours his preaching, it is a limited objective.  Preachings should have in view securing persons for the assembly.
E.E.H.  Yes, the preaching of the cross.
J.R.  That is right, Paul's gospel ought to be preached today, "for obedience of faith", @Romans 1:5.
G.H.  God will have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Tim 2:4.  That is the way it is put.
J.R.  I can understand concern as to attending popular preachings.  If you read Mr Stoney's ministry you will find how concerned he was in his day as to the popularising of preachings; he condemns placards, distribution of bills and all these kinds of things.
S.B.F.  Ought we to regard these things as a challenge?  "Is there no balm in Gilead?  is there no physician there?" Jer 8:22.  That is what we should be asking ourselves, is it not?
J.R.  It ought to concern us that the preaching should be maintained.  How much light has been vouchsafed to us as to the gospel and divine objectives in the gospel!
G.D.P.  The end of the section in 2 Peter is in view of entrance into things being richly furnished to us.  We should enter, that is, go the whole way?
{27}
J.R.  That is good.
E.E.H.  I may stop and listen to somebody on the street; if he is talking about God I want to hear what he is saying.
J.R.  Yes, you thank God for every person who preaches and gets souls.  But what we are at is converts being maintained in the proving of reality.  Converts usually manifest by a certain exuberance that they have been called and elected; but then what happens afterwards, is it maintained?
A.B.P.  There is a difference between the gospel of relief and the experience of taking on the faith which God has given and finding that, if I am to be diligent in it, there must be some expression of it; and in the expression of that I get to know God.  In the knowledge of God I realise that I cannot just do anything I like; we are to be temperate in all things, and in that temperance there must be endurance so as not to give way.  In endurance we need God's help and that develops piety, and in that piety you find that there are others who are walking the same way as you, so you find an area where brotherly love can flow, and that leads to the flow of love which is response Godward.  The gospel is the gateway, but this is experience in Christianity.
J.R.  That is very encouraging and helpful.
T.D.N.  "Use diligence to make your calling and election sure, for doing these things ye will never fall", v 11: is something active, is it not?  The disciples persevered; things were against them but they went on nevertheless.  So things may be against us but we are going to persevere because we have an objective.
J.R.  That is right, and the perseverance forms us in these features which Mr Parker has spoken about.  The scriptures read in Colossians and Hebrews support what we are saying.  The Colossians had made some progress; Paul speaks about "seeing your order", Col 2:5; things in Colosse seemed to be all right but there is a certain danger area, and the 'if' comes in there.  We are only safe as we are linked with the headship of Christ which Colossians presents, the greatness and glory, the personal glories of Christ, the One who is the Head.  In Colossians that is how headship is presented, it is the greatness and glory and sufficiency of the One who is our Head.  We need never lack anything because of the One who is our Head.
{28}
E.E.H.  Verse 23 fills out your point.
J.R.  "If indeed ye abide in the faith founded and firm, and not moved away from the hope of the glad tidings, which ye have heard".
E.E.H.  The glad tidings has an object in mind.
J.R.  That is right.  It is Paul's glad tidings: "of which I Paul became minister".
B.T.  Should we not see that the glad tidings has an object for us in assembly life here now?
J.R.  That is it, we are to have that objective before us continually.  In your contact with persons and in preaching you cannot avoid being coloured with what your objective is.  You may not say what your objective is but it obviously gives colour to your whole outlook and presentation of things.
A.B.P.  Apollos was a popular preacher, was he not?  He did not object to being instructed in the way of God more exactly.  That is where you often find the barrier with persons who are prepared to go so far but no further.
J.R.  It is to the commendation of Apollos that he accepted fresh light from Aquila and Priscilla, not gifted persons but simple Christians, and he listened to them and gained by what they presented to him.
T.D.N.  Paul left at Ephesus the persons that helped Apollos.  That is a good place to leave the brethren.  Paul had an objective: "to the end that we may present every man perfect in Christ".  That is what our preaching should be.
J.R.  That is right.
E.T.M.  Does it not make you restful when you seek to pursue quietly and unassumingly what is normal to Christianity?  You do not need to be apologetic.  Paul says to the Corinthians in the second epistle, "our word to you" (chap 1:18) -- "our word", that was the way he received it from the Lord normally to express it in the area where the Spirit of God was free.  He says, "our word to you is not yea and nay"; that is not assuming anything; that is normal.  We need to be restful about these things because what is normal is normal.
{29}
J.R.  Persons who have been vouchsafed light as to the assembly have special responsibility to be real, and our reality involves light as to the assembly, the local assembly.  I think you will find that, after the division at Glanton where the issue was local responsibility and the Lord's rights in a locality, we had over forty years of ministry largely related to the local assembly.  Now it seems to me the challenge in our day is: are we to act in the light of the assembly in our localities, being governed by assembly principles and looking for assembly features?  You cannot have the service of God without persons locally secured by the gospel and who have some light as to the assembly.  You cannot have these things without separation and faithfulness, and proving our reality.  Separative exercises prove our reality.  2 Timothy 2 is the way by which we arrive at local assembly conditions.
J.A.P.  The address that Mr Taylor gave on church principles was in your city in 1915 (NS Vol 7, p323).  It is a very instructive word as to what governs us in our local assemblies.
J.R.  I think you will find that Mr Taylor's ministry after Glanton was largely related to local assembly conditions.  That is what the recovery had in view, Paul's economy of local assemblies.  Now that does not mean that those who meet and break bread claim to be the assembly, because the loaf viewed rightly reminds us that all who are indwelt by the Spirit form the assembly.  Nevertheless we are to be concerned to provide suitable conditions for the Lord to come to us.
R.M.C.  Would these assembly features be embraced in Proverbs 4:18, "But the path of the righteous is as the shining light, going on and brightening until the day be fully come"?  There is something that would be pleasurable to the heart of Christ.
J.R.  That is right.  It is what you have in @2 Timothy 2:22; "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace".  These features did not begin when the breakdown came in; these are features that always marked assembly persons whether at Pentecost, or at Corinth or in Ephesus under Paul's teaching.  If you get a person pursuing righteousness, faith, love, peace, you have an assembly person.  In @Matthew 18:20, "where two or three are gathered together unto my name", the Lord anticipates conditions in which we are, yet assembly principles are still workable.  There is always a way of righteousness in the midst of the breakdown.  We are more conscious than we have ever been that we are part of the breakdown, yet there is always a way of righteousness in the midst of it.
{30}
R.M.C.  That is very helpful.
Brooklyn NY
12th May 1973
{31}
THE ULTIMATE AND THE IMMEDIATE
@Revelation 22:7; @Revelation 22:12-14; @Revelation 22:20-21
The coming of the Lord is the great ultimate in Christianity.  Our great ultimate objective, therefore, is to be the coming of the Lord.  The ultimate as it is set before us and occupies us is meant to result in something immediate.  It is very interesting that the apostle John, the one whose ministry was reserved for the time of public breakdown, should be the one to give us a view of the ultimate.  The first chapter of this book, Revelation, presents the Lord Jesus appearing in a certain attitude which was occasioned because of the failure of the assembly publicly.  Towards the public position, Christendom, the Lord has maintained that attitude right down through the centuries to our own time.  It is encouraging therefore that John, the one who had this light as to the Lord's attitude in chapter 1, should be the one to expand before our vision the greatness of the ultimate that divine love has in view, the ultimate of this dispensation.  This is very significant and very encouraging.  The more we feel the breakdown to which we have contributed (we always held the doctrine that we are part of the breakdown, but now it is not only a doctrine but we are conscious of having actively contributed to it) the more we shall understand how the Lord feels about it.  I think the ultimate end in view in the ways of God is the world to come, and the ultimate end in view regarding the purpose of God is eternity.  John shows us these great ultimates that God has in mind.  The more we feel the breakdown, the more the ultimate is meant to strengthen us and fortify us.
In that great chapter regarding the resurrection of the saints, which is another view of the ultimate, Paul's conclusion is, "So then, my beloved brethren, be firm, immovable, abounding always in the work of the Lord", @1 Corinthians 15:58.  The ultimate as put before us and engaging us is meant to have an immediate effect in the way of committal, in perseverance, and stability and balance; this would be the immediate effect of having a fresh view of the ultimate.  The ultimate will be ushered in by the coming of the Lord, which will be when the assembly will be complete and will appear in creature perfection.  This is near, as we know.  We have always held that the Lord's coming is near.  It would be obvious to say that it is nearer than ever it was.  Everything points to the Lord's coming being near.  Great results will show themselves when the Lord comes.  Many families will be secured;
{32}
the Old Testament families will all be completed; the Lord will put these saints in their families, and the greatest of all the families, the assembly, will be complete.  For the first time the Lord will have the assembly as a complete, perfect vessel for His pleasure.
The first four verses of Revelation 21 show us the order of things in eternity.  The great ultimate in view in God's purpose will be an eternal, fixed order of things, an unchangeable order of families for God's pleasure, and God all in all.  Then from verse 9 the apostle John sees the place that the assembly will have in the world to come.  The world to come is obviously the conclusion of all God's ways, however difficult to understand some of His ways may have been.  There will be a manifestation that will justify all God's ways, and the assembly will have a unique place in administration in that wonderful world to come, of which we speak, of which maybe we ought to speak more than we do.  I read these verses in which the Lord says "Behold, I come quickly".  "I come quickly" is the ultimate.  The uninstructed or doubtful believer might wonder that the Lord says "I come quickly".  He might count the number of centuries there have been since the Lord said "I come quickly".  If we had some impression of the great capacity of the assembly we would understand why it has taken so long.  The Father has had the allocation of time and has devoted two thousand years to the formation of the assembly.  It is so great, its capacity is so vast, that a certain time had to be allowed for its formation.  Think of the moral fibre that enters into the personnel of the assembly!  Think of the assembly complete after all the history of it, the history of persons and the work of God in them, and the moral fibre through conflict, through sufferings including martyrdom, in all these centuries!  But the Lord's outlook is "Behold, I come quickly".  That is the ultimate, but the immediate effect upon us is to be this: "Blessed is he who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book".  Now dear brethren, we have much committed to us to keep.  If the enemy had his way he would deprive believers of certain things they ought to keep.  The Lord's word to Philadelphia was "Hold fast what thou hast, that no one take thy crown", Rev 3:11.  Think of the crown that has been granted, and the ministry that has been given.  There is something we have to keep.  We are in the midst of a giving up attitude; many are giving up things of value.  "Blessed is he who keeps".  The more the ultimate occupies us the more the immediate effect will be to strengthen us to keep and hold fast and give up nothing that the Lord has imparted to us.
{33}
In verse 12 the Lord says "Behold, I come quickly, and my reward with me, to render to every one as his work shall be".  The Lord is "the righteous Judge", 2 Tim 4:8.  Everything will be fair, everything will be right.  If anyone ought to get a reward, he or she will get the reward.  The Lord appreciates every little bit of response to Himself, every little bit of faithfulness, whether it be at school or in the workshop, wherever it may be, and He forgets nothing.  "My reward with me... I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end".  What is to result as to our immediate circumstances?  "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city".  The ultimate is "Behold, I come quickly, and my reward with me" but the immediate effect is to be "Blessed are they that wash their robes".  It is not a once-and­for-all thing, as we are often taught; it is to be a continual process.  Are we going to be careless?  There is a good deal of carelessness around us.  Are we going to be careless or are we going to see to our associations, our contacts, all that kind of thing?  "Blessed are they that wash their robes".  In the light of the ultimate there is to be an effect on the immediate.  It applies to each one of us, dear brethren.
In verse 20 "He that testifies these things says, Yea, I come quickly.  Amen; come, Lord Jesus".  It would be good if every one of us responded thus.  Then the immediate result is to be "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints".  Do not we need grace?  The remark was made as to how ruthless and how rough we have been.  That word 'beauty' that occupied us in the reading might read 'graciousness': 'To behold the graciousness of the Lord'; 'Let the graciousness of the Lord be upon us', @Psalm 27:4; @Psalm 90:17.  "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints".  We are always in need of grace.  How do we handle situations?  How do we handle one another?  I would just say again that the occupation with the ultimate would help us on this line.  The immediate would be "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints".  May we all be encouraged.  We are about to be ushered into the ultimate.  Let us be faithful in the immediate, the daily toil, whatever it costs.
Grangemouth
18 May 1973
{34}
THE CITIES OF REFUGE
@Numbers 35:9-15; @Deuteronomy 19:1-3; @Joshua 20:1-6
It is interesting to see how Jehovah made provision for the manslayer.  It is provision made for a certain kind of sin that could result in the execution of judgment, yet Jehovah makes provision.  There was no such provision in the wilderness.  This provision relates to the land of Canaan.  The land of Canaan as applied to us is not heaven literally.  There will be no need for provision for any untoward circumstance because no such thing will arise when we are in heaven literally.  But Canaan, the land of promise, suggests what is to be enjoyed down here.  It is heaven known while we are down here.  We need to understand that as believers we belong to heaven.  We do not belong to earth and visit heaven; we belong to heaven and visit down here.  That is the believer's true status.  That is what dwelling in the land of Canaan means.  The instruction therefore begins in Numbers, "Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye pass over the Jordan into the land of Canaan, then ye shall appoint for yourselves cities: cities of refuge shall they be for you".  This provision relates to the land of Canaan.  It relates to what is unfolded in the epistle to the Ephesians, for we have to go to that epistle to understand the fulness of Christianity.
Jehovah foresaw that provision for the manslayer would be needed in the land of Canaan and he makes provision for persons who are involved in this kind of sin.  Jehovah does not suggest that they lower the level of things to suit the manslayer or that they should accommodate the manslayer on his own terms.  Jehovah directs that there should be cities of refuge and we find in the book of Joshua that these were Levitical cities.  As we know, the tribe of Levi did not inherit with the other tribes, they did not have their own territory in the land.  Joseph had two tribes which makes up the number twelve; the twelve tribes inherited territory in Canaan, but the tribe of Levi did not inherit territory.  They were given cities with suburbs and six of these were appointed to be cities of refuge.  These Levitical cities were distributed, forty-eight of them, throughout the land on both sides of Jordan and they were meant to exercise a heavenly influence over the tribes.  I have no doubt the idea of locality would enter into the twelve tribes having an inheritance.  But the tribe of Levi had no inheritance; therefore it is more
{35}
than simply a local matter although it would be worked out in localities.  The Levitical outlook would be a universal outlook and we need to have this outlook today.  There were forty-eight cities and they were meant to maintain what is typical of the heavenly level and to exercise heavenly influence over the tribes because there were Levitical cities in every tribe in Israel.  Therefore God did not lower the level to accommodate the manslayer.  The manslayer would suggest in our day dishonour done to the Lord Jesus.  We find that in the second chapter of the Acts.  Peter, in his preaching, opens the gates of the city of refuge for the guilty Jews.  They had crucified the Messiah yet Peter opens the gates of the city of refuge for every repentant person to flee into.  God in His mercy and grace provided refuge for persons who were guilty of the crucifixion of Christ.  In our day any dishonour to the name of Christ would involve guilt; but God's provision is the city of refuge.  The heavenly level is to be maintained, not common ground made with persons who dishonour the Lord.  We have to be jealous, dear brethren, for the Lord's rights and God's rights and maintain these rights, and at the same time have an outlook towards persons who dishonour the Lord's name; not by making common ground with them, nor by accommodating ourselves to them in their present state, but by maintaining what is right according to the heavenly level.  That is the idea of the city of refuge.  In Ephesians the evangelist is mentioned among the gifts but he is not mentioned among the gifts in 1 Corinthians.  Also in chapter 6 of that epistle part of the armour mentioned is having "shod your feet with the preparation of the glad tidings of peace".  These two ideas suggest the city of refuge.  The level is to be maintained in its height and fulness and there is to be a readiness to be available to repentant persons.  Paul himself no doubt found the city of refuge in Damascus.  He tells us in 1 Timothy 1:13 what kind of man he was: "Who before was a blasphemer and persecutor, and an insolent overbearing man: but mercy was shown me because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief".  That is, he found a city of refuge available as he was repentant.  These cities maintained the level, therefore, of the rights of Christ and the rights of God and were in the enjoyment of the heavenly inheritance.  The tribe of Levi, as I said, did not have territorial inheritance.  Their inheritance was the "offerings by fire of Jehovah the God of Israel" and "Jehovah the God of Israel" Himself (Josh 13:14, 33).  They were taken instead of the firstborn in Israel; therefore they represented the best that God had in mind for His people down here, and these cities were to exercise this influence over
{36}
every locality.  We need therefore to come in our own locality under the influence of this Levitical outlook in the land of Canaan.
In the book of Deuteronomy you again find it linked with the inheritance: "When Jehovah thy God hath cut off the nations whose land Jehovah thy God giveth thee, and thou hast dispossessed them, and dwellest in their cities and in their houses".  Not only did they come into the land of Canaan but they were to dispossess and they dwell.  It is a question of dwelling in the land of Canaan; for us, dwelling in the wonderful privileges of our heavenly inheritance.  We have only perhaps touched the fringe of the greatness of the privileges of the inheritance we have.  Then it says: "Thou shalt prepare thee the way".  Not only were cities to be appointed throughout the land but they were to prepare the way.  They were to be evangelical.  They were to clear away every obstacle so that the way was clear for the manslayer to flee thither: "that every slayer may flee thither".  This would be a practical matter as to removing every obstacle.  We have put some obstacles in the way of persons.  There would be a need now to remove every obstacle so that the way is prepared and marked.  There was to be no doubt in persons' minds as to where the city of refuge was.  The obligation to prepare the way had to be accepted to make it as easy as possible for persons to find the city of refuge.  We know, only too well, how things are confused in our day and we are part of that confusion; we have contributed to it.  Damage has been done to persons and we have added to the confusion.  There is need, dear brethren, to prepare the way so that as far as possible we should not add further to the confusion but in some way make the city of refuge plain.  No doubt we need to be Deuteronomic persons to do this.  Moses in the last two months of the last year of his life is speaking in wisdom to God's people in the book of Deuteronomy that they were to prepare the way.
In the book of Joshua we find these cities appointed and it is in this book that we find that there are forty­eight Levitical cities, six of which are cities of refuge.  We find here what the manslayer is to do.  It contemplates that the way has been made as easy as possible for the manslayer to find the city of refuge.  The territory is divided so that he knows where in his territory the city of refuge is, and he comes to it.  "And he shall flee unto one of those cities and stand at the entrance of the city-gate, and shall declare his matter in the ears of the elders of that city".  His matter is acceptable as he is repentant and he is invited into
{37}
that city.  It says, "they shall take him into the city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them".  We have all fled to the city of refuge, we have all been taken into the city unto them.  There is a touch of affection in this, there is a touch of brotherly love in it: "and they shall take him into the city unto them".  It reminds us of the book of Genesis when the dove returned to Noah.  It says that Noah "put forth his hand, and took her and brought her to him into the ark", Gen 7:9.  Indeed, all the animals came unto Noah into the ark.  It was not the ark exactly that was the attraction, Noah was the attraction.  So persons become attractive here.  This manslayer would be better off being in a Levitical city, having a place amongst the Levites in this heavenly level of things; he would have a part in exercising this heavenly influence.  We have all been manslayers, we have all dishonoured the Lord Jesus, we have all failed as to maintaining His rights and the rights of God.  Have we all come this way of declaring our matter?  Have we found that we have been taken into the city unto them and are given a place and dwell among them?  There is a family idea in this; all the wealth of the family is enjoyed in this city.
Well, it is our privilege in this locality to maintain a city of refuge which depends on dwelling in heaven and being visitors down here, maintaining the rights of God and the rights of Christ and being evangelical in our outlook, preparing the way and ready to take "unto us" into the city and provide dwelling conditions.  May the Lord help us in it!
Edinburgh
10th July 1973
{38}
DIVINE GUIDANCE
@Genesis 45:25-28; @Genesis 46:1-5; @2 Kings 19:14-16; @Nehemiah 5:6,7; @Acts 16:6-10
In these scriptures we have presented to us persons who found themselves in difficult situations, and we might learn from the way in which each one gets the divine answer.  We sometimes speak as if it is difficult to get the mind of the Lord, or to find where the Lord is, but I would like to say at the outset that the Lord Jesus is more desirous of imparting His mind than we are of receiving it.
The Lord does not put obstacles in the way of His people getting His mind.  He is desirous of imparting to any genuine enquirer what His mind is regarding any particular matter.  It would help us to see things from this standpoint that the Lord desires to have persons down here to whom He can make known divine secrets.  The obstacles are with us.  We are the obstacles.  We need to search our motives, and to see what our real desires are; whether we are acting according to the desires that come to us through the work of God in us, or whether anything fleshly or natural enters into our enquiries.
I think as we proceed we shall see what is in mind.  These four persons are confronted with certain situations and we can learn from them as to how to proceed, how we can get the answer.  I am not so much concerned about the situations in which they found themselves; I am more concerned about the features that are manifested in these persons.
We began with Jacob.  We know the history of Jacob and his sons, Joseph and his brethren.  In the context here his brethren have apparently got right.  They had been very wrong.  Joseph was sold into Egypt by the instrumentality of his brethren.  His brethren were guilty, but here they have been to Egypt for the second time and Joseph has made himself known to them.  There is a change with these brethren now, and they bring a good report to their father Jacob.  The report is that "Joseph is still alive, and he is governor over all the land of Egypt.  And his heart fainted, for he did not believe them".
{39}
Jacob might have given good reasons why he did not believe them.  They had brought back reports previously.  They had deceived their father.  Jacob gets the glad tidings that Joseph is still alive, and he is governor over all the land of Egypt.  Jacob could have brought forward reasons why he should not go to Egypt.  He might have said, 'My grandfather Abraham went to Egypt, and that was not a good move.  He ought not to have gone there.  Isaac was warned (Gen 26:2) not to go to Egypt, and the report has come back by persons that I have reason to distrust because of their involvement in something previously'.
So it says, "They spoke to him all the words of Joseph, which he had spoken to them".  This was altogether different from what they had said previously when they manufactured their story, but here they speak to Jacob "all the words of Joseph, which he had spoken to them.  And he saw the waggons that Joseph had sent to carry him".  There was the true report and there were the waggons.  The waggons were the proof that they had had to do with Joseph on a new footing.  The waggons came from Pharaoh; it was Pharaoh's suggestion originally that there should be waggons sent for Jacob and the wives and little ones.
The waggons were the evidence that a change had taken place in these brethren.  They were different.  They had not come before with waggons.  No doubt waggons relate to the Spirit, the carrying power of the Spirit, and these brethren manifested something that they had not manifested before.  This was a test to Jacob -- was he going to accept this report?  It says, "He saw the waggons which Joseph had sent to carry him.  And the spirit of Jacob their father revived.  And Israel said, It is enough -- Joseph my son is yet alive; I will go and see him before I die".
Now what I want to point out is this, that after Jacob moves, he gets the confirmation.  He gets the word from God after he moves.  He moves as a result of the report and the sight of the waggons, but afterwards he gets the confirmation.  Many of us would like the confirmation before we move, but that is not the divine way.  It was not the way with Abraham.  He was called to go out from his land, and from his kindred, and from his father's house, and he received the confirmation after he went.  Jacob "took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beersheba; and he offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac.  And God spoke to Israel in the visions of the night and said, Jacob, Jacob!  And he said Here am I.  And he said, I am God, the God of thy father; fear not to go down to Egypt".
{40}
This is a most important matter; that is, we move when we ought to move.  We move when there is the evidence that the move is a right one, and then we get the confirmation.  God comes in, and how full is the confirmation Jacob gets -- "I am God, the God of thy father -- fear not to go down to Egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nation.  I will go down with thee to Egypt".  Think of God being with him in this movement.  What confirmation this was, "I will go down with thee to Egypt, and I will also certainly bring thee up; and Joseph shall put his hand on thine eyes".  No doubt this was in view of Jacob being put to sleep at the end of his history here.  What a history he had -- 147 years of it -- but God assures him that at the end, Joseph would put his hand on his eyes.  It is like being put to sleep through Jesus.
Jacob knew he was near the end of his life, although he spent 17 more years in Egypt, but the confirmation he gets looks right forward to the peaceful end he was to have.  In fact he had a remarkable end, possibly the most remarkable of all the patriarchs, because he blessed his twelve sons and worshipped.  What an end! -- and Joseph put his hand on his eyes.  This gives some idea, dear brethren, of the confirmation the Lord would give us as we move rightly, but we do not get the confirmation until we move.
Now in the second book of Kings we have Hezekiah faced with a difficult situation.  It was the threat of Sennacherib and the Assyrian armies.  I am not so much concerned with what the situation was, I am more interested in how Hezekiah acted in this situation.  He "received a letter from the hand of the messengers, and read it; and Hezekiah went up into the house of Jehovah, and spread it before Jehovah".  He wanted an answer to the present difficulty.  He did not know how to move or what he ought to do but he read the letter and "went up into the house of Jehovah, and spread it before Jehovah.  And Hezekiah prayed before Jehovah".
Dear brethren, we have a resource in prayer which it may be we are not fully availing ourselves of.  We have a resource in individual approach to God.  We have the privilege of gathering for prayer too.  I sometimes wonder whether we get the full benefit, and advantage, of our gatherings for prayer.  It is a wonderful privilege we have; we have access to God in prayer.  It says here that "Hezekiah went up into the house of Jehovah"; that is, that in his day there was an arrangement for one like Hezekiah to approach God in His house.  He would not have
{41}
had access to the holy of holies, but he must have had access somewhere, and he availed himself of it.
How different might have been the result if every letter received recently had been read, and taken into the presence of God and spread out there.  Do we make full use of the resource we have in prayer in approach to God?  We have access that is far nearer than the access Hezekiah had, but he made full use of the access available to him in his day.  It says, "And Hezekiah prayed before Jehovah and said, Jehovah, God of Israel, who sittest between the cherubim, thou, the Same, thou alone art the God of all the kingdoms of the earth -- thou hast made the heavens and the earth".  The greatness of God filled the vision of Hezekiah.  As in His presence, he is not speaking about God, he is speaking to God.  He is consciously in the presence of a God so great.
Then he says, "Incline thine ear, Jehovah, and hear; open, Jehovah, thine eyes, and see".  Have you ever asked God to incline His ear and listen?  The fact is we do not need to ask God to incline His ear to listen.  His ear is always open to every genuine enquiry and every genuine prayer to Him.  We do not need to pray to Him to incline His ear and to open His eyes to see.  His eyes are open and He is more desirous of imparting than we are of receiving.  The resource we have in prayer is wonderful.
John says in the last chapter of his first epistle -- "This is the boldness which we have towards Him, that if we ask Him anything according to His will He hears us" (@1 John 5:14).  We do not need to ask God to incline His ear, or to open His eyes and see.  "And if we know that He hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we have asked of Him" -- that is approach to God.  No matter what situation arises, dear brethren, whether we are young or old, whether it is an individual matter, or a family matter, or a local matter, or a matter affecting all the saints universally, we can have access to God in prayer.  What a resource we have!  We need to be encouraged to make full use of it.  God is always ready to listen to us as we pray thus.
Now Nehemiah is confronted with a difficult situation.  It is a situation which arouses his righteous indignation.  He says, "I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words".  He was right to be angry, but what did he do?  Did he act in his anger?  Did he act hastily?  He says, "I consulted with myself".  If Nehemiah had lived in our day he might have got on the telephone to somebody, but he consulted with
{42}
himself.  He must have had something in himself to consult.  What did Nehemiah consult in himself?  No doubt he consulted the work of God in himself.  No doubt he analysed his desires and motives.  He consulted with himself; he would consult his committal to what God was doing in his day and what was becoming to that committal.  There was something of maturity in himself which he could consult.  It means that he would consider the matter alone, alone.  He would be apart from any influence for the moment.  He would allow no other influence to intrude.  He consulted with himself.
You will remember in the first chapter of Matthew that, a certain situation having arisen, Joseph the husband of Mary was minded to do something about it.  It says that "Joseph, her husband, being a righteous man, and unwilling to expose her publicly, purposed to have put her away secretly; but while he pondered on these things..."  Pondering on things is something like consulting with oneself.  He pondered.  I do not know how much we ponder.  It may be that we can explore this matter of pondering, of consulting with oneself.  "While he pondered on these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream saying, Joseph, son of David, fear not to take to thee Mary, thy wife".  That is, he got the word as he pondered.
This is something which I think we could develop in.  It would prevent us from coming under wrong influence.  It would prevent us from acting hastily.  While the anger was on Nehemiah he consulted with himself and then he acted.  What comes in between his anger and his remonstrating with the nobles was his consulting with himself.  Therefore, when he remonstrated with the nobles it would not be in the flash of anger, but would be in a considered, sober manner.  There was a great result from this.  This matter, which had suddenly sprung up and come to his ears, and was the subject of his righteous indignation, was settled.  He was effective in how he went about this matter.  "I consulted with myself; and I remonstrated with the nobles and the rulers... And I set a great assembly against them".
If you read down the remaining verses of the section you can see how the whole matter was settled.  Those who were oppressing took it upon themselves to cease the oppression.  The idea of "your brethren" comes in.  There is no party activity.  Consulting with oneself would preserve us from any party activity; it would always be a danger among us to form a party of some kind.  He consulted with himself, then he
{43}
remonstrated with the nobles, brought in the assembly, and the whole matter was settled.  What it results in is "all the congregation said Amen!  And they praised Jehovah", @Nehemiah 5:13.  It resulted in praise to God.  Anything that comes in among us of oppression or taking personal advantage of others -- all that kind of thing -- must hinder the service of God.  But this matter was sorted out by the way in which Nehemiah acted, and the result was praise to Jehovah.
I think the passage in the Acts brings out sensitive relations with the Holy Spirit.  Paul and his company had reached a certain point and the next move was indefinite.  They did not know what the next move was to be, so it says, "Having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia … they attempted to go to Bithynia, and the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them".
It means that there was an area here of sensitive relations with the Spirit.  Why did Luke say that the Holy Spirit forbad them, and "the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them"?  What is the difference between forbidding and not allowing?  There is a sensitive area here of relations with the Holy Spirit.  Well, this would be open to any one of us.  The Spirit of God is very sensitive.  It must be so -- He is the Holy Spirit.  He cannot commit Himself to anything.  It says of the dove sent out of the ark by Noah that she found no resting place for the sole of her foot.  Think of the sensitiveness of the sole of the foot of that dove.  Think of the sensitiveness of the Holy Spirit.  Just think, too, of how coarse and insensitive we have been; but I have no doubt the Lord would have us sensitive as to the presence of the Spirit, sensitive as to what the Spirit is indicating.  We certainly lost that sensitiveness, and we have had our part in a current of things which was not of God.
It is a time now to have sensitive relations with the Spirit.  I am not saying that I know much about it, but I can see the need for it, and I can see the possibilities of being in this area where there is sensitiveness to the operations of the Spirit.  The Holy Spirit forbad them; the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them.  I am not attempting to explain why Luke says this, but Luke writes it this way and he himself must have arrived at sensitive relations with the Spirit.
Well, as we were saying in the reading, the Holy Spirit is the One of the Holy Trinity who has come to be with us.  The Holy Spirit is the sent One in the present arrangement of the economy.  When the Lord Jesus was here, He was the sent One, and the Holy Spirit identified
{44}
Himself with the Lord Jesus as the sent One.  In the present arrangement, the Holy Spirit is the sent One, sent of the Father and sent of the Lord Jesus.  He is the One who has come to be immediately with us and in us.  I sometimes wonder whether we are as conscious as we ought to be of the immediateness of the Spirit's presence, the immediateness of His presence here at this very moment.  It is a wonderfully advantageous area to be in, where the holy Spirit is present, and where there is what suits His sensitiveness and where He is free to operate.
Well, that was so here.  They did not go to certain places, because they were sensitive as to the Spirit's indications.  Then we find that they concluded.  It was a spiritual conclusion they came to because of the sensitiveness of their relations with the Spirit.  They did not get immediate confirmation, as Jacob did; they had to wait for that.  No doubt they would be tested as to whether their conclusion was right.  The spirit of Python was operating against it.  You will always find opposition -- subtle opposition -- in this area of the sensitiveness of the Spirit, the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Jesus.  We, dear brethren, here this morning, are a confirmation of the rightness of the conclusion which Paul and those with him came to at this juncture, because it was the means of the gospel coming to Europe.  We are the confirmation, right down the centuries since, that this move which was taken in this area of sensitiveness as to the Spirit's movements was a right one.
Well, may the Lord encourage us.  May we not complain too much about the difficulty of finding the right way, or knowing what the Lord's mind is, or knowing where the Lord is.  These persons we have spoken about give us some indication of what is open to us.  May the Lord help us in this.
St Albans
24th November 1973
{45}
"PRESENT YOUR BODIES"
@Romans 12:1-11; @Romans 14:19; @Romans 15:5-7; @Romans 15:14; @Romans 16:16
It might be thought by some that what has engaged us during these two days has been on a somewhat high level, and beyond them.  Therefore I have read from the epistle to the Romans, because the very holy matters we were speaking about have their elements in this epistle.  Romans is the basic epistle.  It sets out the gospel according to Paul, the gospel of God concerning His Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
The epistle begins with men, just as they are in this world, in dark heathendom, the moralists and philosophers, and the favoured Jewish nation, and condemns them all -- "All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God", @Romans 3:23.  According to Romans every man, no matter what his upbringing, or his natural ability, has sinned, and the gospel introduces one Man, Jesus Christ.  Chapter 5 speaks of "the one Man, Jesus Christ" (@Romans 5:15), and God in the gospel would attract every one of us to Him.  This epistle is meant to set every believer in relation to the one Man, Jesus Christ.  This is basic, and very important.  This is where we start.  Is every one here related to the one Man, Jesus Christ?  How important this is!  If we are going to understand anything of God's things, we have to be related in faith and affection to the one Man, Jesus Christ.
Romans tells us how we arrive at it, "through faith in his blood" (@Romans 3:25); faith in the blood of Jesus; how simple it is!  It speaks of "him that is of the faith of Jesus" (@Romans 3:26), very simple, very attractive: I trust everyone here has faith in the blood, and that everyone is of the faith of Jesus.  It speaks about "believing on Him who has raised from among the dead Jesus our Lord, who has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification", @Romans 4:24-25.  It is good to begin at the beginning, so that we are not talking over the heads of anyone, and Romans deals with all this.
Then it speaks about the believer being justified by faith -- "Therefore having been justified on the principle of faith", @Romans 5:1.  We are not justified publicly.  You cannot prove to any man in the world that you are a forgiven sinner.  He would not require proof that you are a sinner, but you could not prove to anyone you are a forgiven sinner.  The proof will come in the world to come; there will be ample evidence then.  Meantime, we are justified by faith.  It is a kind of secret we have,
{46}
because of being related to the one Man, Jesus Christ; we are justified on the principle of faith, and have peace towards God through our Lord Jesus Christ.  These are wonderful statements, but these blessings come to us as we are in relation to the one Man, Jesus Christ.
Then it speaks in chapter 6, about freedom from sin.  Twice it says, "having got your freedom from sin", @Romans 6:18, 22.  What does that mean?  It means that sin is no longer your master.  You have changed your master; you have changed from sin to the one Man, Jesus Christ.  We were speaking about the young man of Egypt whom David's men found in the field, 1 Sam 30:13.  He had served his Amalekite master, and he fell sick and his master cast him aside; he had no more use for him.  David's men found him and brought him to David, and he is fed, refreshed, and revived.  He made one stipulation -- 'Do not send me back to my master'.  He is typical of one who is related to the one Man, Jesus Christ, and who has found all he needs in Him, and who finds fellowship and life among those who are committed to the one Man, Jesus Christ.  He has got his freedom from sin, freedom from the Amalekite master, and has committed himself to another Master.  Sin is for him no longer the master.  Have we all got as far as this in our souls?  Sin in Romans 6 is a system of things; it is all around us in the world, and Satan would have us serving sin; but let us change our master for the one Man, Jesus Christ.
In chapter 7 we read that we are "to be to another".  This involves affection, a link in affection.  It has in mind not only service, but supply.  It involves being nourished in affection by another.  You now have another Husband: You have another Master in chapter 6, you have another Husband in chapter 7.
Chapter 8 depicts the wealth that comes to the believer in the Spirit, the Holy Spirit of God.  Romans goes over this ground, and I am going over it briefly to indicate what is available to the believer down here.  It speaks about the Spirit of God dwelling in us.  What do we know about this?  Have you received the Spirit?  Is the Spirit of God dwelling in you?  We can make no progress in the things of God until we have the Spirit of God dwelling in us.  Then it speaks of having the Spirit of Christ.  That involves some formation; it means that the Spirit of God finds suitable dwelling conditions in the believer so that there is a formation in the Spirit of Christ.
{47}
It goes on to say that "we more than conquer through Him that has loved us", @Romans 8:37.  Think of that -- not only conquer but more than conquer.  Now, is that your experience?  We may not be able to say much about this, but we are to know a little about it.  I trust everyone here knows a little about these things.  Then, just in case anyone wonders about God's committal to the nation of Israel, Paul gives us three chapters to set every mind at rest as to God's dealing with the nation, so that up to the end of chapter 11 every matter is set out plainly, every problem is solved as far as God is concerned and as far as the believer is concerned.
Then we have chapter 12, "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice".  Now this is something that happens from our side.  The "compassions of God" is the unfolding of God's mercy, God's provision.  How ample, how magnanimous, it is!  And then Paul exhorts them "to present your bodies …"  Would you like to know anything about forming part of the one body?  Would you like to know what it is to be in the family of God in reality, to form part of that divine family?  Would you like to know what it is to come under divine teaching, and have a part in the care of God's interests down here?  How do you start?  You begin by presenting your body a living sacrifice.  There is no other way, dear brethren.  Have we all done that?
Somebody here might say, 'I do not get all the help from the Spirit that I would like to get'.  Have you ever presented your body a living sacrifice?  Maybe the Spirit is waiting for you until this presentation comes from your side.  The Spirit will not present your body for you; it is what you do, what each one of us does; "… present your bodies a living sacrifice".  This means that your body, the members of your body, the faculties you have, you commit, you hand over, to God without recall.  Have you ever done that?  Dear brother or sister, you can do it now.  Do not wait until you get home; do it now!  You can confirm it when you get home, but do it now.  If you feel any urge, if you have any sense of God's compassions and God's provision, if you feel any desires within you to come into the good of what we have been speaking about these two days, then, I would say to you, 'Present your body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God'.  You say, 'Will God accept my body?' Yes, it is acceptable to God.  It may be that the Spirit is waiting until someone here presents his body, or her body, and then He
{48}
will say, 'Now I can help you; now I can provide you far more supply than ever you have known in the past'.  Any deficiency with us in knowing the help of the Spirit and the wealth of divine provision could be traced to a lack of committal of this kind.
This is the beginning of discipleship.  This is how the believer becomes a disciple.  The moment comes when he presents his body a living sacrifice.  He may not always live up to it; maybe no one here could say that he has always lived up to his committal, but do not let us be shaken in our committal; let any failure we have had reconfirm our committal that our body is presented "holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service".  This word for "service" is priestly service, it is a priestly action; it is presenting to God something acceptable.  Think of that!  This is possible for every one of us.  This is how we begin to come into the wealth of the things of God, and there is no means of coming into the wealth of what God has for us apart from the presentation of our bodies.  Thus we become disciples.  We become committed to the will of God, as it says, "Be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God".
Think of persons down here whose bodies are committed to the will of God: What a privilege we have, what a privilege everyone here has!  Would someone say, 'I would rather have my own way; I would rather have things as I want them; I would rather have my own natural inclinations satisfied; I would rather be in a circle where things are according to what pleases me'?  That is not presenting your body a living sacrifice, and that is not proving what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.  The gospel tells you the will of God is good.  There is nothing better for you than to commit yourself to the will of God.  It is acceptable.  As you accept the glad tidings as to the goodness of the will of God, you find it acceptable; then you prove it to be perfect.  It is far better than your own way, or your own natural inclinations or your own natural tastes.  It is the perfect will of God.
It goes on, "For I say, through the grace which has been given to me, to every one that is among you, not to have high thoughts above what he should think; but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith".  Have you a measure of faith?  Has each one here found what his measure of faith is?  I believe you will never know what your measure of faith is until you present your body a living
{49}
sacrifice.  You have a measure, a part to fill, according to the will of God.  So you do not have high thoughts above what you should think, but you have something.  I remember Mr E T Maynard saying, to illustrate what we are speaking about: 'If I have a pound and I say I have two pounds, I am not right; but if I have a pound and say I have nothing, I am not right either'.  If I have a pound I have something.  Thus you find you have a measure of faith and you function according to the measure of faith God has sovereignly given.
Paul then goes on to speak about the one body as "one body in Christ"; not in Adam, not in human organisation, but "one body in Christ".  By presenting your body a living sacrifice to God, and by being with persons locally, you find what your measure of faith is, and then you begin to find your place in the body.  Mr Stoney used to emphasise the importance of finding our place in the body.  There is a place and function in this wonderful organism down here.  It speaks of "a measure of faith" in verse 3, and in verse 6 of "the proportion of faith", and "the grace which has been given to us".  There is a measure and proportion of faith and grace to fill out our place in the body.  This is not difficult to understand.  You present your body a living sacrifice, you think of yourself soberly, locally, and you find you have a measure of faith, and grace which has been given, and you thus function in the one body in Christ.
The one body in Christ is universal; it is the one body down here at any given moment.  There was one body in Christ on the earth when Paul wrote this, and there is one body in Christ on the earth at this moment; and by presenting my body a living sacrifice I find, in some sense, what it is to have a measure and proportion, and the gift of grace, that help me to function in the one body in Christ.  It is a wonderful order of things.  This shows the way into it simply, not beyond the reach of any believer.
It goes on, "Thus we, being many, are one body in Christ, and each one members one of the other"; it is an organism down here where believers belong to one another, and form one body in Christ -- that is its status and it is animated by the Spirit of Christ.  It is a wonderful order of things down here into which believers are called by the gospel to have part in functionally at this moment.  Although there is public breakdown and public confusion, this is meant actually to function down here.
{50}
So Paul goes on to speak about "members one of the other".  You will notice in the scriptures read that this expression "one another" comes in.  The one body in Christ is universal; it is the one body down here; yet things are meant to function locally, and we have regard to one another; we are members one of another.  According to @1 Corinthians 6, our bodies are members of Christ.  "Do ye not know that your bodies are members of Christ?", @1 Corinthians 6:15.  Think of that!  Your body, presented to God a living sacrifice, becomes a member of Christ, a member for the expression of Christ.  It is a wonderful possibility for each one of us to enter into by way of committal.
It speaks about various services, different gifts; there is great variety, but as we function according to our measure of faith, according to the proportion we have, there is no collision, the variety all fits in.  It speaks in Peter about "the various grace of God" (@1 Peter 4:10), something given to one, something else to another, and all functions normally and smoothly; that is the divine idea.  You come into it by presenting your body a living sacrifice, and there is no other way.  Paul says, "as to brotherly love, kindly affectioned towards one another: as to honour, each taking the lead in paying it to the other".  It comes down to two persons, the one to the other; and no matter how many more there are, this principle operates, it is one another.  It is the family also; it is one another as belonging to that family.
Chapter 14 says, "So then let us pursue the things which tend to peace".  We were speaking about using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace.  You find the element of that here -- "Let us pursue the things which tend to peace".  Can we all commit ourselves to that, as having presented our bodies a living sacrifice, in order to fulfil the will of God?  Then let us pursue the things which tend to peace.  Then it says, "And things whereby one shall build up another".  There are the things of peace and the things of mutual edification.  So there is an order of things that is being built up.  We touched in Ephesians on the body in its fulness, in its self-building up in love (@Ephesians 4:16) here; each one has a part in that building up and mutual edification.
In chapter 15 we have, "The God of endurance and of encouragement give to you to be like-minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus".  This does not mean that all the brethren have to come round to what I think!  Someone said, 'It would save an awful
{51}
lot of trouble if everybody just thought the way I think'; but it says here, "according to Christ Jesus".  It is a local setting, it says, "that ye may"; "… give to you"; and "… that ye may with one accord, with one mouth, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ"; it is one answer locally to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.  What a possibility!  It is more than a possibility, it is working; but it is a possibility for each one here to function in this one thing for the pleasure and glory of God.  "Wherefore receive ye one another, according as the Christ also has received you to the glory of God".
Then Paul says, "I am persuaded, my brethren, I myself also, concerning you, that yourselves also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another".  This would involve taking on care for one another, taking on responsibility for one another.  "Able also to admonish one another"; there is such a family atmosphere, and such a mutuality, that there is the admonishing of one another.  There is not an official admonisher in the locality; it is admonishing one another.  It is how we practically help one another.
Then, finally, "Salute one another with a holy kiss".  Paul has been presenting his salutations to individuals who were in Rome.  It is one thing to salute somebody at a distance, but we are sometimes tested as to whether we always salute one another with a holy kiss.  We read about Joseph that the first indication of something wrong in the family was that his brethren could not greet him with friendliness.  We have known something of that.  Let us continue to salute one another with a holy kiss.
I remember Mr Taylor coming to Edinburgh and giving an address on 'A holy kiss', and the next night he had a reading on 'Local assembly administration'.  You will find in the volume (NS vol 43) that the reading comes before the address, but actually the address came first on the need for the maintenance of brotherly and sisterly relations locally, which would provide conditions for good administration.  There is something instructive and important in that.  Let us continue, dear brethren, to salute one another with a holy kiss.  May it be so.
Sandwell
13th April 1974
{52}
GOING ON TO FULL GROWTH
@1 John 2:14-17
In the readings we have had there has been an appeal to persons who would be expected to continue the testimony, if the Lord does not come for us soon.  In this second chapter of John's first epistle he addresses the saints as his own children, not exactly as children of God, which chapter 3 presents.  He begins the chapter by saying, "My children", and he continues the subject of his family in verse 12, "I write to you, children", that is, all who belong to his family.  There are three stages of growth in that family -- the fathers, the young men, and the little children.  John has a right, because of his apostleship, to take the place of being a father and having children.  In a sense they are the children of the testimony.  To apply it to our own day, without going too far, it would be like the children of the ministry of the revival.  There are those who have gone before us who have taught, based on what is in the Scriptures, and on what was set up from the beginning, and we are meant to be persons who are thus instructed.  We were speaking of the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, @Acts 2:42.  Not only did they listen to the teaching of the apostles, but they had their fellowship, their practical fellowship.  Any one of the apostles would be approachable about any matter of soul history that anyone might have, or any individual difficulty.  So we are meant to be of the family of the testimony which has been brought to bear upon us in the revival.
The young men of John's family represent the intermediate stage of growth.  There has been an appeal to young men in these meetings, and this scripture would apply, of course, to them.  But it would apply to more than literal young men, because the next stage which John refers to is the fathers.  John has no instruction, and no exhortation, to give to the fathers, because they had reached stability.  They "have known him that is from the beginning".  I do not know how many of us would take the place of being fathers in this sense, therefore the idea of young men might be more embracing than just literal young men.  "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one".  Reference has been made to energy.  We need to apply our energies in a right direction.  How important this is!  The little children are in danger of the attacks of the wicked one by false teaching, and that kind of thing.  Now the unction,
{53}
which John points out later in this chapter, would protect them, and keep them right as they are true to it.
The young men have overcome the wicked one.  There has been a certain development and growth.  They know what is right and what is wrong, "Because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one".  The word is, "Love not the world, nor the things in the world".  If there is to be further growth, and formation, we need to protect ourselves from being diverted by the world and the things of the world.  This would not only apply to younger persons, but to all of us, because we can all be diverted, unless we have "known him that is from the beginning", which would be fulness of growth in John's family.  Such were at a stage where John addresses them as fathers, "Ye have known him that is from the beginning".  There is a certain stability reached, but I do not know how many of us would have reached that.  Therefore this intermediate stage is so important, that we should persevere.  "They persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers", @Acts 2:42.  John continues, "Love not the world, nor the things in the world.  If any one love the world, the love of the Father is not in him; because all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father but is of the world".  How near these things are to us!  We do not need to take a journey to come under the influence of these things.  They are in every one of us, in the flesh in us.  The safeguard is the love of the Father.
Now I would like to refer to three young men in the Old Testament who would be examples for us.  They had come to an intermediate stage of growth, and they go on to become fathers.  The first is Joseph who at seventeen years of age was feeding the flock with his brethren.  He had found a circle of interest according to the will of God, according to what the Lord would have him do.  He had found sufficient scope for his energies.  He was strong, he was feeding the flock with his brethren.  He had overcome the wicked one.  He had no fellowship with the evil discourse of his brethren, who had the same father.  He had overcome the wicked one.  He had a judgment and could confide in his father Jacob as to his judgment of the evil discourse of his brethren.  He kept himself, and he was loved by his father.  "If any one love the world, the love of the Father is not in him".  Joseph had the love of his father in him.  He found this circle of interests and he was in the
{54}
enjoyment of the love of his father.  What a protective circle this is!  What salvation it was for Joseph to find an environment in which he could breathe freely!  In the strength of the love of his father, he went through the sufferings which his brethren subjected him to, being sold into Egypt.  He had thirteen years of suffering in Egypt.  What sustained him?  It was on the one hand the enjoyment of his father's love, and on the other hand the light imparted to him by God in the dreams he had.  See what a privileged area this is to be in, to find in the Christian circle a circle of interests to which we can direct our energies and apply ourselves.
The next one I would speak about is David.  He began as a young man.  He fed his father's flock at Bethlehem.  He overcame the wicked one.  As a very young man he slew the lion and the bear.  He knew what it was to overcome.  He knew what it was to be in victory, according to his measure.  We might never have known that, because it was his own secret history, had it not been that Saul tried to dissuade him from meeting Goliath.  David tells him the secret, that he knew a better armour than Saul's; he had proved it.  He had devoted his energies to feeding his father's sheep at Bethlehem.  It would be like the local company; we are to devote our energies to promoting the Lord's interests in the places in which we are.  We find that Saul sends for him to come into his court and play with the harp to remove the evil spirit, but David went back to feed his father's flock at Bethlehem.  He knew what it was to find locally a circle of interests for his energies, to which he committed himself.  He found salvation and he was able to grow according to God in that environment.  Also, David got light early as to the ark, which would be Christ typically.
The third one is Daniel, who was also young.  He had light as to Jerusalem, and although he was carried captive and put in very trying circumstances, he was able to overcome the wicked one.  He reached this intermediate stage of growth that John would refer to as his young men, and he goes on to fatherhood.  He becomes an old man, and what a father he became among the captives!  He prayed, and what light God was able to impart to Daniel!  He as a young man refused the king's delicate food, and the wine which he drank, which would be so attractive to youth.  Not only did he refuse the king's delicate food and the wine that he drank, but he told the man who was set over them what to give them.  He said, 'Give us pulse and water', which would be most
{55}
unattractive to the natural mind.  He developed a taste for the truth, for the Scriptures, for accredited ministry.  He preferred it.  Think of that! -- He preferred it!  He chose it, rather than what was so attractive to the flesh.  "Love not the world, nor the things in the world"; that was Daniel.  He became an overcomer.
These young men in the Old Testament would encourage us to commit ourselves, encourage us to persevere, to go on to full growth.  We were reminded in Edinburgh recently that the divine objective for us all is full growth, "until we all arrive... at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ", @Ephesians 4:13.  That calls for perseverance.  May the Lord encourage us, so that this work of formation may go on with every one of us.  It means that we commit ourselves and persevere, the Spirit helping us.  May it be so for His Name's sake.
Dundee
27th September 1974
{56}
ADMINISTRATION
@Matthew 18:15-20; @Deuteronomy 17:8-13
J.R.  The Lord may help us to consider His provision in view of sin coming in, in view of failure on our part.  Where would any of us be, or where would any of our localities be, if the Lord had not made ample provision for failure and breakdown?  The Lord has foreseen what we needed and made certain arrangements for us, that when there is sin or failure on our side, there is a remedy, there is an answer to it.  There is provision made for sin coming in between brother and brother, or, of course, between sister and sister; there is provision made for offence being settled between them according to the divine standard.  If that does not succeed there is something in reserve, that is one or two besides, and then the great reserve is the assembly.  I trust we may be helped to see how the assembly is available to us in this setting at the present time: "Tell it to the assembly".  There is a certain level of things where there is the answer to every difficulty; whatever comes in, there is a full answer.  We need to learn how to arrive at this, how the assembly is available, how it operates and how we come into the good and benefit of it in facing difficulties which come in, have come in and, if we are left here, very likely will come in.  What do you say?
A.J.E.W.  It just affects me that the spirit of the new covenant enters into this.  God has come in from His side in the work of Christ to resolve everything, and that is the point that is to govern us.  Matters are not to be left, nor to be ignored, but to be resolved according to God, and the new covenant enters into that.
J.R.  I am sure it does.  We need to see that matters can be resolved.  There is no matter that cannot be resolved.
R.S.R.  In the beginning of the chapter the Lord Jesus called a little child to Him and set it in their midst and there is no suggestion that the child was taken away.  Is that the spirit which would help us?
J.R.  Yes, I am sure it would.  If we had read the whole chapter we would have seen that in the first section down to verse 14 a little child is very much in mind: the Lord refers in verse 14 to "one of these little ones".  A little child is in mind and not withdrawn throughout the whole chapter.  You will notice that down to verse 20 is one statement of the Lord Jesus.
{57}
"The disciples came to Jesus saying, Who then is greatest in the kingdom of the heavens?  And Jesus having called a little child to him, set it in their midst" and began to speak, and His speaking is without interruption down to the end of verse 20.  In verse 21 Peter has another question to ask, but down to verse 20 it is one statement of the Lord Jesus therefore it all hangs together.  We read in verse 2, "Jesus having called a little child to Him set it in their midst", and in verse 20, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them".  There is a link between a little child being in their midst and "there am I in the midst of the them".  Do you think so?
E.C.B.  Yes, I do and it seems as if the Lord is really saying to them that this little child is exemplifying features of Myself.  What Mr Welch said is of importance, because it is the same sense in which the spirit of the new covenant underlay the old covenant, God providing for sin being dealt with with grace on His side, was it not?
J.R.  That is right; even in the old economy there was provision made for sin coming in, and there was an adequate answer to it which satisfied God; how much more in Christianity!
E.C.B.  If God had not provided means of dealing with things He would have to come in in judgment; but He has left a resource.
G.W.B.  Do you understand verse 20 to apply to an expression of the assembly in any place?  It behoves us to have great respect for the assembly in any place even if there be only two or three.
J.R.  Exactly.  "Again I say to you", in verse 19, would make way for conditions in our own day.  Down to verse 18 would be strictly applicable before the breakdown came in but "Again I say to you" makes provision for days such as we are in now.
G.W.B.  So that we must not give up any of the truth that we have been brought to in relation to the assembly, however few there may be in the locality.
J.R.  In connection with what you are saying, verse 17 says "Tell it to the assembly" and verse 18 says "Whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth".  Who are the "ye"?
G.W.B.  The assembly, surely.
{58}
J.R.  The "ye" would be the personnel of the assembly.  The Lord then says in verse 19 "Two of you".  These are the same kind of persons as He speaks about in verse 18, are they not?  "Whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven".  The "ye" would be the personnel of the assembly.  "Again I say to you, that if two of you", that is the same kind of persons coming through into our own day.  Is that what you understand?
G.W.B.  It is the greatest comfort and support at the present time where there are only two or three in many places.
A.J.E.W.  It would not be going too far, would it, to say that the little child was still in their midst?  The Lord had set it there and, as you say, it is one statement right through.  So that the Lord would include the little child in the "ye" in the spirit and character of it.
J.R.  That is just it.
F.C.M.  So that, whilst accepting the humbling character of the public position, it is not assumption, should the sad necessity arise, to call a meeting of assembly character.  I only remark that because some no longer with us call it claiming high ground, but this passage would emphasise the rightness of it and the necessity for it.
J.R.  I am sure that is just it.  We would fail the Lord if we did not resort to assembly character when needed.  To go on with sin would be dishonouring to the Lord.
S.G.S.  In that regard, referring to what we touched earlier yesterday -- the mind of Christ -- would we expect the Lord's mind about a matter?
J.R.  Yes, I am sure that is so.
C.H.  Does this suppose assembly-minded persons, persons who take heaven's view?  It explains what you have enquired about in verses 18 and 19.  Whilst there are the two or three, there is a qualification: "Gathered together unto my name".
J.R.  I am sure that is right.  The scripture in Deuteronomy speaks about the place which Jehovah will choose and, as is added in chapter 12, "to set his name there", v 5.  I think there is a link between the place that Jehovah has chosen to set His name there and "unto my name".  "Unto my name" is not presumptive claiming, it really makes way for what the Lord can put His name to.  What do you think?
{59}
C.H.  It involves moral qualifications because 'unto his name' eliminates every other name.  I was thinking about Mr Welch's suggestion as to the covenant.  You referred to verse 14: "It is not the will of your Father who is in the heavens that one of these little ones should perish".  It means, do you think, that you have the Father's feelings as you approach the brother?
J.R.  That is very helpful.
F.N.S.  Is there an identity between the "two or three", or the "two of you", and the "those" of 2 Timothy 2:22?  If we take any ground at all it is that we call upon the Lord out of a pure heart.  That would involve having unmixed motives as to His own rights and claims, and this would make us morally qualified for being in this position that you are speaking about in Matthew 18, and in character have assembly features.
J.R.  Exactly.  It speaks in that chapter about the Master.  "If therefore one shall have purified himself from these, in separating himself from them, he shall be a vessel to honour, sanctified, serviceable to the Master, prepared for every good work.  But youthful lusts flee, and pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart", vv 21, 22.  Your suggestion is that these are the same kind of persons as the "two of you" or "two or three... gathered together unto my name".  I think that puts the matter rightly.
L.A.B.  Is the Lord's commendation of Philadelphia a link with this: "not denied my name", Rev 3:8?  I wondered whether it meant that in a day of breakdown there was the maintenance of the rights of the Lord here in this scene.
J.R.  Exactly, that is right.
S.D.K.R.  Regarding this passage, "If thy brother sin against thee", it has been claimed that this is only a personal matter.  If a brother compromises the fellowship, is that a sin against me?
J.R.  I should think it is, if you get to know about it.  Maybe nobody else knows about it but you know about it.
S.D.K.R.  This passage amongst some has been ruled out in connection with matters affecting general fellowship, that it is only a person that has done something personally against me.
{60}
J.R.  In verse 21 it says, "Then Peter came to him and said, Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me and I forgive him?  Until seven times?  Jesus says to him, I say not to thee until seven times, but until seventy times seven".  That is a new covenant attitude.  It is the attitude of forgiveness regarding personal matters.
S.D.K.R.  That is helpful.
J.R.  What do you think?
E.C.B.  It almost seems as if Peter missed what the Lord had said.  He "came to him" and asked a question which took the Lord back to the beginning of what He had said.  The Lord said "If thy brother sin against thee, go, reprove him between thee and him alone" and Peter says "How often" shall he sin against me?  What the Lord says to Peter would obviate the rest of the procedure because you would forgive him; but if it went on and it was not possible, it would have ultimately to come to the assembly.  But there is something implicit in the question that Dr Roberts asked, that we easily tend to think it more important to deal with offences against ourselves than offences against the rights of Christ in the assembly, and we then get the thing the wrong way round.
J.R.  That is very helpful and very important.
J.M-l.  In regard to Dr Roberts' question, do you think that, if it is possible, priestly persons would cover matters, and the more that can be dealt with in this way the better?  But then if matters have to be told they are told to the assembly.
J.R.  That is the truth, the more things can be confined the better.  If they can be satisfactorily settled in a confined way they are satisfactorily settled as far as God is concerned.  Is that right?
J.M-l.  I think so.  Care should be taken not to tell things that involve individuals.  Do you not think we should be very guarded as to matters becoming the subject of gossip, for instance?
J.R.  It is "thy brother".  It is a setting of the kingdom and discipleship, yet it involves the family feelings: "thy brother".
C.H.  Is it also priestly?  You go to the brother in a priestly way to show the true nature of a thing; reprove means that.  We do not go as legislators exactly but as those who have the Father's feelings; and that
{61}
involves giving place to the Spirit to show the true character of a thing, to help the brother to judge it if possible.
J.R.  That is very helpful.  Your reference to verse 14 "the will of your Father who is in the heavens", is very interesting because it is "thy brother" in that relationship.
C.H.  Quite so.  As to Dr Roberts' question, it is after all a fellowship, a partnership, is it not?
J.R.  Exactly.
S.N.C.  If we keep more before us the family idea there would be more affection entering into our dealings with one another, would there not?
J.R.  That is right.  The Lord says "your Father".  We would say 'our Father': "Our Father who art in the heavens", @Matthew 6:9.  Our appreciation of our relationship with Him would help us to view each other in a respectful and affectionate way.
S.N.C.  I am sure that is right because naturally you do not want your family matters to be divulged abroad.  It is just as a man would not go speaking abroad about his wife, he keeps that to himself, does he not?
J.R.  That is right.  He would be jealous as to the family dignity.
E.M.W.  Does the Lord make provision for the unusual?  He speaks about the spirit of a little child and then later of His being in their midst; but He says "if thy brother sin against thee", as though it should really be unusual; and yet there is a provision, as you said, to meet it.
J.R.  That is very fine.  If we were all in the good of what we had yesterday the unusual would not occur, but we all know how far short we come in practice of what we had yesterday in the normality of what is available for us.  We ought to live in the joy and good of it.  What you say as to the unusual is important.
A.A.B.  As in John's epistle, "if any one sin" (@1 John 2:1), so it would be in the spirit of advocacy in our relations with our brother.
J.R.  John begins that chapter by saying "My children, these things I write to you in order that ye may not sin; and if any one sin"; that is the unusual coming in, interrupting, do you think?
A.A.B.  Yes, I think that greatly helps.  In another connection, I would like to ask for further help as to the link between the Deuteronomy
{62}
scripture and Matthew 18.  Is it your thought that "the place which Jehovah thy God will choose" is something available in each locality, not necessarily another place literally?
J.R.  Yes, it would be available in each locality, yet it is above the details and circumstances and the feelings and all the kinds of things that arise.  In Deuteronomy 17 a journey is involved, a journey from where the difficulty is.  We know how we can become obsessed with the difficulty, the details of it, the circumstances, the persons involved, sometimes prejudice, sometimes preference, and all that kind of thing; we get bogged down.  But they take a journey.  It says "arise" in verse 8: "Then shalt thou arise, and go up to the place which Jehovah thy God will choose".  You can understand in Israel something happening within certain gates, but then they arise and take a journey and the further they get away from the place where it happened the less the details would count, and they come into another environment, another area.  That transferred to "tell it to the assembly" is what we need to experience.
A.A.B.  It is a higher level, as you say, above the detail of the matter, involving the augustness of the assembly.  You used the expression, the assembly being available to us.  How does that work out?
J.R.  This area we are speaking about, this elevated level of things, is available to us, were we all able to drop the other things that bog us down.  The tendency (and I speak from personal experience) is to go, as we say, into assembly with feelings and obsession with details and all that kind of thing, whereas we need to take this moral journey.  If we actually took a journey it would help us in a sense, but it is a moral journey we take.
A.A.B.  The way Paul approaches the Corinthian issue in the first nine verses of the first chapter would involve what you are speaking of.  He approaches the whole matter at the level of the assembly of God before getting into the detailed side.
J.R.  Exactly.
A.J.E.W.  @1 Corinthians 1:2, "called saints, with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours": is not that, in a sense, the moral journey?  That is "in every place" that one name and what belongs to it is governing us.
J.R.  That is very helpful.
{63}
E.C.B.  I think what is being said is of the greatest importance, as to getting out of the atmosphere of the trouble.  When you come to Matthew 18 you come to it by way of chapter 16, and the assembly to which you bring it is "my assembly" where cause and cause and stroke and stroke and controversy are relegated to their own level and the atmosphere is His.
J.R.  Quite so.
J.A.P.  Would @Acts 15:2 confirm what you say?  It says "A commotion therefore having taken place, and no small discussion", and so forth.  But when the matter came into the assembly what order, what grace among the brethren, what unity was reached in that chapter!
J.R.  "It has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us" (v 28) is the conclusion arrived at.  It is a sphere where the Spirit dominates, the Spirit's mind is available.  It says in Deuteronomy 17, "Thou shalt come... and inquire".  The place that Jehovah will choose is in a certain contrast to "within thy gates".  "If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and blood, between cause and cause, and between stroke and stroke, matters of controversy within thy gates, then shalt thou arise, and go up to the place which Jehovah thy God will choose".  It is of interest that in the instructions given in @1 Corinthians 5, which has in mind a meeting to deal with evil, Paul says "For I, as absent in body but present in spirit, have already judged as present, to deliver, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ (ye and my spirit being gathered together, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ)" (vv 3, 4) -- "ye and my spirit".  Paul was not there personally but his spirit was there.  It just gives some idea of the place that Jehovah will choose.  The thing is faced locally but has in view what you referred to in Matthew 16, the assembly universally.
E.C.B.  Yes; what you are saying makes me wonder whether we would not be better advised to revert to the old custom that an assembly meeting for discipline was a meeting specially arranged, and that if after discussing something in care we, as we used to say, go straight into assembly, we may not be leaving time for the journey you speak of.
J.R.  I think that is just right.  If we go into assembly character immediately, we tend to go in with feelings, details, controversy, preferences, maybe prejudices: all these things in our minds.
{64}
E.C.B.  Sometimes it may even be proved to have been valuable that the Supper intervened.  The Lord knew that the thing was being carried in a priestly way, but the Supper helps you to get to the place that He chooses.
J.R.  Exactly.
H.A.H.  So would it be right to connect this thought of the place, and what Mr Welch has said as to the new covenant, with the reference to Jerusalem above, "which is our mother", @Galatians 4:26?
J.R.  It is another level, it is above.  We need to take this journey to get to the above, what is above the level of what is controversial which our own personal feelings often enter into.  To act with these feelings is not going to help.  We go and enquire, it is a matter requiring patience.
P.J.H.  What an opportunity in the interim for getting into the sanctuary and learning the way of things!  Did not the psalmist say "Then understood I their end" (@Psalm 73:17) when he went into the sanctuary?
J.R.  He viewed things differently.  It is the place that Jehovah thy God will choose.  "Thou shalt come unto the priests, the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those days".
E.T.M.  It says "arise, and go up to the place which Jehovah thy God will choose".  It is a matter involving what is gradual, what is deliberate, and counting on the Lord's support.  The Lord uses the same term: "if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me", John 12:32.  That would be in mind in a person who is considering for God, arising and going up to the place; and the Lord is with persons who are considering for God firstly.
J.R.  That is right.  You were giving us movement last night, the way to return.  This is the way up.  It is necessary that we take this way up if there is going to be a satisfactory answer to any difficulty.
P.v.d.B.  Would the mount of transfiguration and the scene of glory coming in between chapter 16 and the practical working out of it locally show how this glory and this new covenant character of things would affect the working out of things locally?  Then in the end of that chapter the sons are free.
{65}
J.R.  That is fine, because on the mountain "His face shone as the sun", @Matthew 17:2.  It is the benign influence of Christ.  The sun on which all life on the earth depends is the position Christ has in relation to us.
N.T.M.  "Boaz went up to the gate", @Ruth 4:1.  I wondered if that was the idea; he went up, there was a very important matter on which a good deal depended, even David finally.
J.R.  Very good, it is an upward movement.
D.L.S.  What comes out in this movement is the tenor of the word, and instruction, and then the thought of the law, bringing in, away from the detail of things, the way that God would speak and give right judgment.
J.R.  That is very confirming.  The judge that shall be in those days is spoken of in verse 8.  Between verses 18 and 19 of Matthew 18 we can think of the Lord's appearance in Revelation 1 taking place; that is, the breakdown comes in and the Lord appears as the Judge.  In this chapter of Matthew, that would be between verse 18 and verse 19.  Therefore we have to do with the Judge and what the Judge says to each assembly.  We read, "His eyes as a flame of fire" and so on; He appears in the garb of a Judge.  They "come unto the priests, the Levites and unto the judge that shall be in those days, and inquire".  It is all to be in the light of, and in keeping with, the Lord's judgment.
C.H.  Mr Taylor sen epitomised it in what he said, that we should be governed by the light that governs the position.  What the Lord would accredit the assembly with, we at least try to act in the light and spirit of.  An action taken in any particular locality is really in the light of the whole, is it not?
J.R.  Exactly.  I think that is a very important thing.  Paul's spirit would be gathered with the Corinthians; they have to take the action but he is with them in it.  It is just a suggestion of what is universal, a certain standard entering into the action which takes place in a locality.  Do you agree with that?
C.H.  Mr Taylor also spoke a great deal about the universal priesthood.  That enters into this chapter, does it not?  If there is godly exercise everywhere about certain matters, that is to be carried by what is done in any particular gate.
J.R.  Yes, that is very important.  We can help one another to experience this assembly level we are speaking about.  We can help each other to
{66}
take this moral journey when the occasion arises, leave behind the detail and the controversial side and really reach an assembly judgment on that level.  It comes down to two, two can do this.
A.C.C.  Both Matthew 18 and the scripture in Deuteronomy give the idea of something greater: "Tell it to the assembly" and then "the place which Jehovah thy God will choose".  You get the feeling of something being greater than what you may be dealing with; there is this august vessel that is your resource.  In Matthew 18 the man makes a journey; he finds he has lost his sheep and he goes after it to find it, as if he is coming into the matter as having had this journey.  What he would bring in in the way of feelings and care!
J.R.  Very good, it is the will of your Father expressed in one down here.
R.S.  Does verse 12 support that?  Also is it in line with what you said as to the Judge, which enters into the teaching in Matthew?  The shepherd leaves the ninety and nine on the mountains, whereas in the Luke setting he leaves these in the wilderness.  I wondered if the Lord's teaching on the various mountains in Matthew has to be followed up to get the importance of the level you are stressing.
J.R.  Yes.  In Luke 15 the sheep is lost, in Matthew 18 it goes astray.
C.H.  In Luke the sheep is found.
J.R.  Yes.  The one that is lost is found.  "Gone astray" puts more responsibility on the sheep, whereas, as to the one that is lost, the shepherd accepts the responsibility.
C.H.  Yes, in Matthew it is "if it should come to pass", the Lord leaves it there.  There is perhaps the moral issue there; but Luke presents the divine system operating, the three Persons active in it in view of recovery.
J.R.  Exactly; the assembly, therefore, would come into that.  We need to see that the assembly, as we are speaking of it, is available to us as we are prepared to take the moral journey necessary.  "Then shalt thou arise, and go up to the place which Jehovah thy God will choose".  Everything in that area is according to His approval, according to His thoughts, the place that He chooses; He does not choose any place, it is what is in suitability to Himself.  Now, we provide these conditions.  In the Old Testament it meant that the house had to be built.  There was in that building an answer on the earth to the place that Jehovah will
{67}
choose.  That is what Matthew 18 presents really: "if two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter".
E.C.B.  Is the place which Jehovah thy God will choose the place in which He is known as "the holy, the true", Rev 3:7?  That is to say, you are in a sense beyond the descriptions of Himself in chapter 1 of Revelation, which are broken up in some of the other local assemblies that He addresses, but the atmosphere of "the place" is "the holy, the true", is it not?
J.R.  That is fine.
A.A.B.  Would the matter of judgment involve the distinguishing of both good and evil?  We are somewhat prone to think of judgment in relation to evil only.  What is commendable comes into the Lord's adjudication of the seven assemblies.
J.R.  That is right.  He finds in two of them, Smyrna and Philadelphia, what He finds no fault with.
A.A.B.  Would that help us practically not to lose sight of what is referred to sometimes as assembly status?
J.R.  Quite so.
J.A.S.  "If two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter": that is said and very often left short, but I think the important thing is "whatsoever it may be that they shall ask", which brings in the note of dependence upon the Father and gives us the link with the little child.  What do you say to that?
J.R.  That is right.  It gives a link with the priests, too, in Deuteronomy 17: "thou shalt come unto the priests".  Now this we are speaking about is available to two or three in a locality.
P.H.B.  Does it refer to what Mr Taylor sen called attention to, the highest court of appeal?  That would be final, would it not?
J.R.  Exactly.  It is final in Matthew 18 and it is final in Deuteronomy 17 and it is final because it is God's judgment expressed locally.  It could not be final otherwise; unless it were a right judgment according to God it could not be final.  There is the suggestion of what is normal in Matthew 18 and in Deuteronomy 17 and we need to get into these normal conditions.  The assembly is animated by the breath of Jesus; it is a place where the mind of Christ is and where the Lord's headship
{68}
operates.  It is coming from the unusual into the normal, which moral journey has to be taken.
E.M.W.  I think that is both helpful and important.  Do you not think it essential to emphasise that the place where Jehovah has set His name exists today?  I think Mr Coates says somewhere that we should not be prepared to admit that the place where Jehovah has set His name does not exist today.
J.R.  It exists: "where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them".  Is that not where the place that Jehovah has chosen to set His name exists?
E.M.W.  That is how I understand it.
F.v.R.  What do you say about a brother sinning against you?  Often we take offence in the heat of things and our judgment is not right.  We have to go to God about the matter and we find that what we interpreted as sin was not really intended.
J.R.  Yes, Mr Burr said earlier that we tend to have more regard for things personally than we have for the rights of Christ being violated.
C.W.H.  Is there a link between this place where Jehovah would place His name and the way that the Lord speaks of the Spirit coming: "Whom the Father will send in my name" (John 14:26), the peculiar character in which He is available?
J.R.  Yes, the name of Christ is here.  He personally is up there, He is in heaven, but His name is here, and the Spirit is identified with His name here, and we are to be identified with His name here in the maintenance of what is due to that name and the rights that belong to it.
C.F.D.  I think what is coming forward is instructive.  It would help us to get back to the dignity connected with the way things are presented in Matthew 18, which I believe was lost.  Telling it to the assembly carried a certain dignity, so that actually there was an announcement in assembly at one time.
J.R.  That is right, the anointing, in that sense, was identified with it.  I think what you say is important, that we get back to the dignity of the assembly, because things were done with much lack of such dignity.
G.W.B.  That usually included a word from the Scriptures.  Do you not think that was very profitable and something that, if necessary to have
{69}
such a meeting, should be in our minds?  The judgment should be supported by a word from the Scriptures.
J.R.  I am sure that is right.  You remember that came up in your meetings in Edinburgh.  It is important to go over it because that is part of the dignity of the occasion of assembly character.
E.J.J.  What about the time factor?  I am thinking of the Lord saying "I gave her time that she should repent", Rev 2:21.  Our brother has mentioned about action being final.  Mr Darby, I believe, says somewhere that it is the last possible thing we should think of; so every avenue would be explored.  Both these scriptures suggest that there is time taken, a journey taken and consideration given.  I wonder sometimes whether we are in such a hurry to act that we overlook this, and it would link with what Mr Welch suggested as to the new covenant.  Is this in line with what you are saying?
J.R.  Very much in line and very important, because we knew to our shame something of that haste during certain years.  What Mr Dadd says about the dignity that belongs to the assembly needs to have due regard with each one of us in our local settings.
R.D.P.  Do you get the two things in @Isaiah 42:4: "He shall not faint nor be in haste"?  Do you think there are the two sides in that, both the not fainting and the not hasting?
J.R.  Yes, that is very important too.  We are not to faint.  There is not to be a lack of facing up to what requires to be faced.
D.E.R.  Do you think, too, that if sadly the assembly has to deliberate on a matter we might well be reminded of what we have been taught as to the seriousness of compromising such a judgment?
J.R.  Exactly.  That is what we have, both in Matthew 18:17 and in Deuteronomy 17:11-13.
B.W.W.  Does that mean that the breakdown about which we know something and form part does not alter the gravity of what is set out in Matthew 18?
J.R.  That is right.  An action taken according to verses 19 and 20 is to have as much authority with us as if it had taken place at Corinth when the first epistle was written.
{70}
W.C.L.  Is there something in the fact that in the breastplate of judgment the twelve stones are set in order?  I am linking it with what is in the affections, for all those stones were of great value.  Every one would be on the priest's heart as he operated.
J.R.  That is right.  They would represent local settings.  The individuals would come into it too, but the stones were set in four rows of three which corresponded to the four camps of three.  Is that right?
W.C.L.  That is what I was thinking.  It involves the whole.  There is a glory about judgment which maintains all the rights of God in the assembly.
J.R.  Quite so.  The great public breakdown must have begun through lack of making use of the Lord's provision in unusual circumstances.  That is how it must have happened.  There must have been a violation, or a lack of respect or a lack of making use of, the Lord's provision.  Now, we are to respect the Lord's provision for us when unusual things happen.  There is ample provision.  Do not let us think that we are deprived of anything, there is ample provision for anything unusual happening.
F.C.M.  Would you see a link between the stress earlier in the reading that things exist now, and statements in Hebrews 12: "Ye have come to mount Zion; and to the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem"; then it adds "to God, judge of all; ...and to Jesus, mediator of a new covenant; and to the blood of sprinkling", vv 22-24?  Is this the area to which we are to resort and where there is every divine provision and yet all in relation to what God is, Judge of all?
J.R.  I am sure that is right.  We have come in Christianity to the greatness and dignity of these things you refer to.
A.K.T.  Would gathering "together unto my name" involve on our part self-judgment lest any personal or natural motive might intrude, but that the rights of the Lord might be paramount?
J.R.  That is it, I am sure.  We have been taught that "there am I in the midst of them" is a consequence of two or three gathered together unto my name; it is not exactly a promise but a consequence.  That is, we provide the place which Jehovah will choose.  That is to be in our minds.  As we were saying, the house had to be built, satisfying divine requirements; there was a building on the earth which answered to
{71}
Jehovah's desires as the place He would choose; it became tangible when the house was built.  Thus we need to provide the conditions and two or three can do that; two or three in a locality "gathered together unto my name" provide the conditions that the Lord would say, This is what I choose.
W.L.  Mr Taylor sen used the word 'franchise'.  What would you say about that?
J.R.  That is authority to act and is important.  That depends on conditions.
A.T.  Others ought to discern where the Lord is in a matter when the priests act rightly.
J.R.  Yes, if it is right according to right judgment it is normal for it to be recognised.
A.T.  Yes.  Sometimes you find two agreeing this way and two agreeing that.  The brethren need discernment, do they not, where the Lord is in the matter and where the enemy is in the matter?
J.R.  Yes.  The exercise before us now is to take this moral journey and arrive at true assembly conditions and thus right judgment.  Of course these conditions are in persons and can be in two or three.  The Lord says here, "if he do not hear thee, take with thee one or two besides".  He does not say in verse 17 'take with thee others also', as if it is on that level.  "Tell it to the assembly" is another level altogether involving a moral journey to reach this level of things, for divine judgment is available for us.  Is that clear?
E.C.B.  Yes, and I think these things are of the greatest importance and are reviving us to something that we once knew.  But is all this actually the counterpart of purifying it in Ephesians 5?  That is, Christ does that from His side, but then there is the responsibility on our side.  The way in which He does it sets the standard for the way in which we maintain responsibility.
J.R.  I am sure that is so.  There is to be a corresponding moral answer, practically and tangibly.  It is this practical and tangible side where we need help.  We must have the truth of the assembly abstractly but we are to be exercised to provide the tangible answer, and that is possible.  It is not a glorious impossibility, it is what is open to us and available for us.
{72}
E.C.B.  Does not all this, from another aspect, emphasise that ministry generally should be calculated to raise the level of things amongst the brethren?
J.R.  Exactly.
H.C.H.  @Psalm 122 speaks of "set thrones for judgment, the thrones of the house of David".  Would that speak of dignity?
J.R.  That is right.  The Psalm opens with "I rejoiced when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of Jehovah.  Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem".  It is the going up; it is the tangible answer.  "Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem".  It is what we put our feet on, not something that is vague and distant.
H.C.H.  Quite.  Another scripture is "them that turn the battle to the gate", Isa 28:6.  This is the standard.
E.T.M.  The "O Jerusalem", do you think, would be a result of the benefit of the inbreathing?  "O Jerusalem" would be the expression of deep feeling.
J.R.  That is good.
A.B.  Would Hebrews 12:14, 15 help us to find the right way?  "Pursue peace with all, and holiness... watching lest there be any one who lacks the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you".
J.R.  Yes, it certainly would.
F.v.R.  Must we be preserved from trying to cover things up out of sentimental reasons?  Brethren sometimes say, Let the matter rest, it will find a solution.  But you cannot do that, can you?
J.R.  It depends what the matter is.  Certain things you can allow to rest and forget about.  Other things, of course, have to be taken up.  If a matter involves the rights of Christ it has to be taken up.  Mr Becker refers to "Pursue peace with all, and holiness, without which no one shall see the Lord".  That is priesthood.  "Watching lest there be any one who lacks the grace of God".  It is the pursuing peace positively and "watching lest" wrong things should come in.
R.J.C.  Would you say something more as to "the place which Jehovah thy God will choose".  It is not the place that we choose.  Is there a
{73}
certain standard, a certain level, a certain elevation that must be maintained.  Have we to come to that viewpoint?
J.R.  That is it.  I think "unto my name" really understood would involve all that you have said.  "Unto my name" is not what we claim; it is not that we act and claim that this is in His name, it is what He can put His name to as if He could say, I put My name to that action.  It is the place that Jehovah will choose to set His name there.
C.B.  So He says "tell it to the assembly", not 'My assembly'.
J.R.  That is right.  It is the assembly locally, "My assembly" is of universal character, what is on the earth for His pleasure.  In its fulness, I think; 'My assembly' must include the assembly from Pentecost until the rapture, because it is the object of attacks coming in during the whole dispensation; but the assembly according to Matthew 18 is an expression of that locally.
A.T.  So there is always an odour with the name, when things are taken up.
J.R.  That is right.  There is the odour, and there are the rights attaching to that name.
W.McK.  Would you say that the actual presence of the Lord with the saints is the confirmation of the whole thing?  You referred to Christ in heaven and His name down here.  It first says they "are gathered together unto my name", but then He says "there am I in the midst of them".  It is not His name now, it is the Person Himself "in the midst" of the saints as arriving at this.
J.R.  That is very encouraging and helpful.
J.C.E.  In that connection why is it that things come from the Father?  "Whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens".  I had connected it rather with the Lord's name and His looking forward to His being absent personally, though He would be known spiritually where His name was honoured and recognised, and yet things would come from the Father, so great was the Father's interest in these matters in the Lord's name.
J.R.  That is very helpful.
{74}
D.T.H.  Does what the Lord says in John 17 link on with that?  He says "Holy Father, keep them in thy name which thou hast given me, that they may be one as we", v.11.
J.R.  Yes, that shows the Father in His supremacy.  Would not that again refer to the Lord's absence?  He said "When I was with them I kept them".  "Unto my name" involves the Lord's absence publicly but, as Mr McKay said, "there am I" in His presence.  It is how He is personally absent and yet how He is present.  Judas, not the Iscariote, said "How is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us and not to the world?", John 14:22.  He could not understand it.  It is by the Spirit, is it not?
W.McK.  The same distinction is made in 2 Timothy 2.  It is those who name "the name of the Lord"; but later it is "those that call upon the Lord", not His name but the Person.  So that it raises the test in all matters as to what our relations with divine Persons really are, do you think?
J.R.  That is basic.  We will not take this moral journey we have spoken about without having right relations with divine Persons.
J.A.T.  Would Abraham set that out in Genesis 18:22?  It says "And the men turned thence, and went towards Sodom; and Abraham remained yet standing before Jehovah".  Then there is the intercession as to righteous persons not perishing with the wicked.  I wondered whether that is very important.  It would be a question of pausing and considering as to righteous persons.
J.R.  Yes, it would emphasise the importance of being with God.
J.A.T.  The men moved on but Abraham remained there.
J.R.  Yes.  It says before that, "the men rose up thence, and looked toward Sodom; and Abraham went with them to conduct them".  That is, judgment is in mind.  Abraham conducts them and then "remained yet standing before Jehovah".  That is a man with God, one man with God.  Matthew 18 suggests two men like that in a locality.  In John 14 the Lord comes down to one person, what one person could be: "We will come to him and make our abode with him"; but in Matthew the Lord comes down to two, because it is a matter of administration, of acting.  Two or three can take action.
E.P.  Would two or three extend to every person in the place committed to the Lord and the fellowship, gathered together unto His name?  I was
{75}
thinking of the matter of responsibility, as to whether all of us, and I speak of myself first, carry the responsibility that we should in regard to what is due to the Lord.  Every one of us would be encouraged to take it on.
J.R.  I am sure that is right.  When it comes down to two they must accept responsibility: similarly where there are three; but if you get twenty or thirty the optional side comes in sometimes.
F.v.R.  What about husband and wife?
J.R.  Well, in the broken state of things we are in, the remnant conditions, that is all we have meantime in some localities, yet "unto my name" has in mind due regard for the Lord's rights and shows what is possible in small localities.  It is a great encouragement.
J.M-I.  If state is there, there is no less status.  Is that right?
J.R.  That is right.  We do not require big cities and big numbers, it is a question of what the Lord is working out with two or three.  It ought to be a great encouragement to us at the present time.
C.G H.  As to verse 17 of Matthew 18 -- "if also he will not listen to the assembly" -- if there is listening, there is something to be heard.  You said that the Lord might say as to a certain thing, I can attach my name to that.  How is His preparedness to do that conveyed?
J.R.  It is a question of what, to use the language in verse 17, the assembly does and says, which He puts His name to.  It is the acceptance of responsibility to which we have just referred.  Jehovah intimates in Deuteronomy as early as chapter 12 what He has in mind: "the place which Jehovah your God will choose... to set his name there", v 5.  He just suggests what is in His mind.  Many chapters come in between that intimation and the tangible result, the tangible answer in the house built by Solomon.  We are to provide such an answer now.  We are meant to provide certain conditions and do certain things that the Lord can put His stamp upon, His name upon.
C.G.H.  Quite so.  But then to be authoritative, and so taken account of by others, there must be some evidence of that.  Is that evidence in that which is to be listened to?
J.R.  Well, it says "if also he will not listen to the assembly".  If he does listen to the assembly then the person is saved.  If he does not listen it
{76}
amounts to presumptuous action such as is described in Deuteronomy 17.  But I may not have got what is in your mind.
C.G.H.   If the Lord has a mind about something it has to be conveyed.  You cannot limit the Lord, of course, but normally He conveys it through a channel.  Now, what is that channel?
J.R.  It would be in some person, I suppose.  It might involve sitting down and enquiring and arriving at a judgment: "It has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us", @Acts 15:28.
C.G.H.  What I am trying to get at is the source of what is said.
J.R.  It seems to me it is what the assembly does and says which He can trust.  As persons are animated by the breath of Jesus, have the mind of Christ and are under His headship, He can put His name on what is done.  Normally that would be accepted.
E.C.B.  "The heart of her husband confideth in her" (Prov 31:11) is the basis of it, is it not?
J.R.  Very good.
E.C.B.  What may emerge from what Mr Hitchcock was saying is, how do we discern that it was the Lord's mind?  Normally the fact that He confides in the assembly is justified by the assembly's actions, but being in a day such as we are the Lord will, in His own time and if necessary, manifest that He was not in what was done, but that would be abnormal.
J.R.  Exactly.  What Mr Brown said, too, as to the reference to the Scriptures would be important, that is, of course, the Scriptures rightly applied.  So there is wisdom involved in all this.
C.M.  In @1 Corinthians 5 they are gathered together "with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ", v 4.  It should not be entirely unknown today.
J.R.  That is right.  It speaks too, about "In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ".  I remember Mr Hammond in Edinburgh some years ago helped me in this matter.  He said that we always have authority to act and the authority is the name of the Lord but the power for it lies in the Spirit.  We are not to say we have no power to act; we have authority to act and the authority is the name of the Lord.  Is that right?
C.H.  Yes, that holds true today.
J.R.  I am sure it does.
{77}
E.M.W.  We cannot say that we must not act because our state is too low to act.
J.R.  Exactly.
C.H.  As to Mr Hitchcock's question, do you not think that what is said and done in relation to any particular action would bear the evidence that those who have acted or spoken have been with God in it?  That requires, of course, priestly discernment on the part of us all.  It is not a technical thing.  We can get so bogged down in detail whereas, do you think, if we were with God, we should discern where His mind is and whether what is done is accredited or not accredited?  I mean, the priest here seemed to determine the situation.
J.R.  That is right.  The priests, the Levites and the judge are all mentioned together in the one verse.
D.L.S.  These persons in Deuteronomy are in the habit of going up and appearing before Jehovah in the place that He shall choose.
J.R.  Very good.  That is the place where He is served.  It is mentioned in chapter 12.  It says "His habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come"; that is in normality, "and thither ye shall bring your burnt-offerings and your sacrifices", vv 5, 6.  That is a very helpful allusion to the fact that they were accustomed to come there in the normal service.
London
19th October 1974
Key to initials:
A.Becker, Bad Endbach; A.A.Bellamy, Buckhurst Hill; L.A.Barlow, Sidcup; C.Beale, London; G.W.Brown, Barnet; P.Harley Buchan, Peterhead; E.C.Burr, London; R.J.Campbell, Glasgow; S.Chapman, Barbados; A.C.Craig, Airdrie; C.F.Dadd, Plainfield; J.C.Evershed, London; C.Hammond, London; H.C.Hatcher, Kingston; C.W.Hedges, Barnstaple; P.J.Herbert, Newport; C.G.Hitchcock, London; D.T.Howie, Glasgow;  H.A.Hutson, London; E.J.Jarvis, Torquay; W.Lamont, Cumnock; W.C.Lock, Calgary; W.McKay, Sunbury; E.T.Maynard, New York; N.T.Meek, Malvern; C.Middleton, St Albans; J.Mitchell, Sidcup; F.C.Mutton, Redbridge; E.Palmer, London; J.A.Petersen, Plainfield; R.D.Plant, Birmingham; D.E.Remmington, St Albans; J.Renton, Ednburgh; R.S.Renton, Edinburgh; S.D.K.Roberts, Croydon; J.A.Small, London; D.L.Stewart, Edinburgh;  F.N.Stickland, Redbridge; R.Swan, Edinburgh; S.G.Samways, Buckhurst Hill; A.Thomas, Gillingham; A.K.Turner, Rotherham; J.A.Turner, Chippenham; P.van den Berg, The Hague; F.von Rein, Port Elizabeth; E.M.Walkinshaw, Gillingham; B.W.Ward, London; A.J.E.Welch, London
This reading is included here because it was first published in A Word in its Season; it appeared again later in a book from the three-day meetings, The Lord's Provision For Our Times.
{79}
FEATURES WHICH BENEFIT LOCAL COMPANIES
@1 Corinthians 16:15-18; @Colossians 4:12,13; @Acts 20:28-35
The scriptures read refer to persons in certain localities whose presence there was for the good of those localities.  It was a great advantage to Paul, in writing his first epistle to the Corinthians, to know that there was the house of Stephanas there.  Much of what he wrote was severe and there was rebuke, but it would be a comfort to him to know that there was actually in that locality a certain household which represented what was right and which represented qualities that could be taken on by others in Corinth.  Paul sent Timothy to Corinth; it was an advantage to Paul to send Timothy, here.  Timothy was the beloved and faithful child of his father, Paul.  He represented Paul's spirit and attitude; he represented the product of Paul's preaching; he represented the moral character of Paul.  It was also a great advantage to the Corinthians to have a visitor like Timothy amongst them.  In our movements amongst the brethren we ought to provide some advantage to the locality which we visit.  It would be abnormal to visit a locality and be a sorrow or a burden.  As we visit localities we should present some advantage, some encouragement, represent something that is going to help the brethren locally.  Paul also sent Titus to Corinth, and he would represent Paul too.  There would be a certain definiteness and courage with Titus.  Paul sent both Timothy and Titus there, and they would both represent their father, Paul, perhaps in different features, but both the visits would be an advantage to the locality in Corinth.
Great encouragement as Timothy would be, he was only a visitor.  He was just there for a time and then left again, and so was Titus, he was a visitor and he left; but the house of Stephanas was in the locality, it was part of the locality.  Paul says here, "Ye know the house of Stephanas" -- that is conscious knowledge.  They had not regarded that house as they ought to.  Had they regarded the house of Stephanas as they ought to their behaviour would have been different.  Paul writes, "I beseech you, brethren... that ye should also be subject to such".  He mentions in parenthesis, "Ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the first-fruits of Achaia, and they have devoted themselves to the saints for service".  I suppose we are justified in thinking that this household consisted of a father, a mother and possibly young people.  We have
{80}
such households in our localities.  Such an asset as the house of Stephanas in Corinth could not be calculated.  We have been speaking about Corinth and things that were going on there: there were divisions amongst them.  No doubt there were local leaders and some were saying, 'I am for this one' and 'he is my man', and so on.  Here is the house of Stephanas, which Paul commends.  We need to appreciate the potentiality, dear brethren, of a household like this in our locality.  No doubt the husband and wife in that house of Stephanas would be one in outlook, one in attitude towards the truth, one in attitude in service towards their local brethren, because it says, "they have devoted themselves" -- devoted themselves.  It is something they took on.  The note indicates that it is like an officer appointed to a regiment.  The officer has to wait until he is appointed, but this household appointed themselves for service, dedicated themselves.  This was a dedicated house in this city of Corinth where things were so difficult.  What an advantage to have a household like this!  Whether we have been householders for a long time or whether we are just starting, what a privilege to dedicate the house to the saints for service as this house was.  The parents would initiate this and then the young people, apparently, came into it because it is spoken of as one thing -- the house of Stephanas.  Husband and wife, father and mother, may set out with the right idea, but, if I may address for a moment young people in a godly house, you may bring in something that is contrary, something that is not going to help, something that is not going to add to the saints for service.  How watchful we need to be!  How watchful parents need to be!  How watchful young people need to be that they are always in accord with the house as being dedicated to the saints for service!  Mr Darby in his note here corrects what he writes.  He writes: 'the family of Stephanas had appointed themselves to the saints for service -- given themselves up to serve them, or rather given themselves up to them'.  They were not devoted only to the service, but devoted to the saints for service.  That was a house in Corinth who loved the local brethren as Paul loved them.  When Paul wrote in chapter 4 about sending Timotheus, he referred to him as his "beloved and faithful child" (v 17), but he addresses the Corinthians as his "beloved children", v 14.  He could not say about them 'my beloved and faithful children' because they were not a faithful representation of their father, but Timothy was.  Nevertheless the Corinthians were his beloved children.  With all the faults and with all the difficulties in Corinth, apparently the house of
{81}
Stephanas loved the local brethren just as Paul loved them.  It is easier, as we all know, to love brethren at a distance.  It is easier to go to a locality and love all the saints when you do not know their past history, nor what may be their faults and failings; but here was a house in Corinth who were devoted to the local saints for service.  That house was valuable and was an asset in the place.  When Paul was writing to the Corinthians it was an advantage to them to know that there was at least one house there which apparently was complete in its devotedness to the saints for service.  We do not see any indication of Stephanas being a gifted man, or a minister or a preacher.  His services in that way are not referred to; his house is referred to.
I would like to encourage each one of us to have our house intact for this purpose.  The enemy is always busy; he has been busy -- alas!  He has been able for the moment to secure some of our young people -- I say, for the moment.  The enemy never slackens, never gives up.  If Paul knew the advantage of the house of Stephanas in Corinth, you may take it that the enemy knew too, and he would endeavour somehow to corrupt that house of Stephanas in Corinth.  But apparently things were maintained there.  I would like to encourage us all to have our households devoted in this way to be a help, a stay, a support, an asset, in our localities.  Some of our localities consist of not more than one household.  Think of how much falls on such households in localities at the moment.  Such households would be on the outlook for persons to be affected by the gospel or by the truth, and for persons who have lost their way to return.  We are living in a time of recovery, of revival, of returning.  We were referring to Luke 15 to the returning younger son; he went into the far country but came to himself and returned.  The father ran, fell upon his neck and covered him with kisses before the younger son said anything, before he opened his mouth.  He had made up his mind what he would say, but before he could say anything, "while he was yet a long way off, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion, and ran, and fell upon his neck and covered him with kisses".  It was the father who covered the distance.  He did not wait until the younger son had come all the way, he covered the distance; and then, after he is covered with kisses, the son said to him, "Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee".  How important it is, how obligatory upon every one of us it is to be on the outlook for persons who can be recovered!
{82}
In the second scripture we come to the assembly in Colosse and there is a man there called Epaphras.  Now Epaphras was a gifted man.  Epaphras is referred to as a "faithful minister of Christ for you", Col 1:7.  Apparently he was local in Colosse, but he is a minister, he is a preacher; in fact it would appear from the first reference to him in the first chapter that some at least may have been converted through Epaphras.  They owed the fact that they were taught to Epaphras.  He was a teacher and a preacher and a minister, and he was local in Colosse.  We have a number of preachers; we are thankful for every one of them.  Epaphras would not take up the service of preaching as a mere duty.  Sometimes when a brother is asked to preach he is very reluctant, he does not really want to preach and he is glad when it is over.  That was not Epaphras.  Epaphras was set to get results from his preaching.  He was set to see the work of God progressing.  He would be earnest and urgent in it; he would be prayerful about it.  It certainly would be a duty to a preacher to preach, but it ought not to be merely a matter of duty, it ought to be a matter into which he would put his whole heart and soul.  That, no doubt, was Epaphras here.  We should be like him in the preaching.  There should be heart and soul in it; there should not just be a nominal setting out of things but there should be urgency and definiteness and we should be looking for results.  We can be formal and take up something and be glad it is over, and be glad of a little help maybe.  There needs to be more devotion to this matter: whether it is preaching or giving a word in a ministry meeting or making a contribution in a reading or any kind of service on the principle of gift, there needs to be a certain devotedness in what is undertaken.  Of course, God is sovereign and God can use anyone.  Some have been converted through women preachers; we are glad when they are converted any way, but this matter of urgency and definiteness and devotion to service of this kind is important.
Paul in the first reference to Epaphras speaks about "the grace of God, in truth: even as ye learned from Epaphras", chap 1:6, 7.  These Colossians had come a good long way in the truth; Paul commends them as to how far they had come and, apparently, he gives some credit to Epaphras who was local amongst them.  In our localities, what is our purpose, what is our outlook?  How testing this is!  If we are looking for prominence, be assured we will clash with somebody else.  It says, "Epaphras, who is one of you, the bondman of Christ Jesus, salutes you, always combating earnestly for you in prayers, to the end that ye may
{83}
stand perfect and complete in all the will of God".  What a fulness marked this man!  What a fulness in his prayers!  This fulness of purpose would colour all his activity in his own locality or wherever he was.  Paul says in chapter 2, "For I would have you know what combat I have for you" (v 1) and here is Epaphras in the same combat, "combating earnestly for you in prayers", overcoming obstacles, set for the welfare of his brethren, "always combating earnestly for you in prayers, to the end that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.  For I bear him witness that he labours much for you, and them in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis".  That is a minister in a locality.  We should thank God for everyone who has been given some measure of gift to help the saints, but to such I would say, be in this attitude of prayer, have this purpose, this outlook that Epaphras had, that the saints might stand "perfect and complete in all the will of God" or, as it may be read, 'in every will of God'.  That must involve that Epaphras himself was entirely committed to all the will of God.  He would not be able to help others into what he was not in himself.  He must, in the place, have represented something of this purpose, which was really God's purpose for them, and certainly Paul's purpose for them.
Now in Acts 20 it is not a question of gift; it is a matter of eldership.  Paul sent over for the elders at Ephesus.  These were persons in the locality at Ephesus who took on responsibility.  In the time of Acts 20 such persons were appointed to exercise oversight.  They were called overseers or elders.  Now, this is a most important feature to be found in our localities.  They are not appointed today, they are not official; nevertheless the element of overseership is a very important feature to be in every locality.  Paul in this chapter speaks of himself as having been among them for three years.  He calls attention to himself as an example to these overseers.  He was a model for them and he puts it on these overseers to continue as he had been among them.  How Paul was among the saints in Ephesus is a very high level indeed, but he puts it on these overseers to continue the service he had exercised among them for three years.  They are called elders in verse 17: "he called over to him the elders of the assembly" at Ephesus; and they are called overseers in verse 28.  We do not have appointed official elders now, but every locality is to have the feature of elderhood and overseership.  Elders in cities are not mentioned singly in the New Testament; they are mentioned as together, persons who would carry responsibility and be concerned for the spiritual welfare of the local brethren, because
{84}
overseership or eldership applies to service locally.  They are not necessarily gifted although they might be gifted persons.  They are persons who hold office and yet not officially, persons who would be answerable to God, answerable to the Lord for the welfare of their local brethren.  So Paul says "Take heed therefore to yourselves".  How important that is!  "Take heed therefore to yourselves, and to all the flock, wherein the Holy Spirit has set you as overseers, to shepherd the assembly of God, which he has purchased with the blood of his own".  That was Paul's own estimate of the assembly, Paul's own estimate of the saints at Ephesus.  It is the secret behind the activity and labours of Paul in that city.  Why did he expend himself so much?  He speaks about "night and day" (v 31), "with all lowliness", v 19.  He speaks about teaching you "publicly and in every house", v 20.  How extensive and devoted was his service!  What was the secret of Paul's service?  It was his love for the assembly of God which God "has purchased with the blood of his own".  It is the level at which he viewed these saints at Ephesus and so did not spare himself in service for them.  "For I know this, that there will come in amongst you after my departure grievous wolves, not sparing the flock; and from among your own selves shall rise up men speaking perverted things to draw away the disciples after them".  "From among your own selves" -- from amongst these very overseers he was addressing he saw what could come in, how Satan could come in and spoil that work at Ephesus, which, of course, he did.  Paul parts with them at the end of this chapter 20.  The next they would hear from Paul would be the Ephesian letter, written from Paul in prison, containing three chapters of the glory and dignity of their calling, and three chapter of exhortation that they should walk worthy of the calling wherewith they had been called.  The next letter they received, according to the scriptural record, was by John from the Lord Himself.  The externals were still all right at Ephesus, externals went on as if everything were all right, but the Lord says "I have against thee, that thou hast left thy first love", Rev 2:4.  The pristine freshness of what was set up in Ephesus was left.  The Lord saw the decline and fall of this very assembly here at Ephesus.  Now Paul lays the responsibility here on these overseers.  You will notice that, when the Lord sends by John the letter to Ephesus, it is the angel who is addressed, the responsible element; it is in principle this overseeing element that is addressed as held responsible by the Lord for the state of the locality.
{85}
This matter of eldership is a most important thing.  We have had examples of how the saints ought to be served, the level at which they ought to be served.  It is not official, but it is a very necessary service in every locality that some persons should undertake.  He says "Wherefore watch".  Watchfulness is one of the activities of the overseers.  We need to maintain watchfulness in our localities that things do not come in that ought not to come in, and exercises do not drag on that ought not to drag on.  The principle of overseership is how government and control take place locally, how authority is exercised; of course, exercised in grace but nevertheless there is to be authority that things are not allowed to come in that ought not to come in and things are not allowed to drag on which ought not to drag on.  Paul lays the whole weight of it on the overseers.  "Wherefore watch, remembering that for three years night and day, I ceased not admonishing each one of you with tears".  Dear Mr Parker referred to this scripture at Buckie about admonishing each one of you, no doubt including young persons.  He spoke about a young man in Ephesus who might have been fond of sport.  Paul would get alongside him and admonish him with tears, wean him from his love of sport or whatever it may be to something more worthy of a believer.  How varied is the work of the overseer.  I suppose we all come short in this service.  It is nevertheless a very necessary service.  I suppose the responsibility for the collapse of Ephesus lay somewhat on the overseers.  Paul was very definite with them.  He saw what could come in and he lays the weight of responsibility on them.  Some persons have to accept responsibility in localities for, in a certain sense, the Lord leaves things in our hands.  You may say, He is in control.  He is, but He commits certain things to us and leaves them in our hands.  The question is, are things prospering in our hands or is the enemy getting in?  "I ceased not admonishing each one of you with tears.  And now I commit you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up and give to you an inheritance among all the sanctified.  I have coveted the silver or gold or clothing of no one".  What a servant Paul was; he coveted nothing, not even their admiration, not even a place of honour among them.  Paul coveted nothing, but was committed to the welfare of these saints there for three years.  Then, as I said before, he puts the whole weight on these overseers in Ephesus.
{86}
May the Lord help us in our households locally!  May the Lord help every one of us who preaches or does anything on the principle of gift, and may there be overseers working, exercised amongst us for God's glory!
Edinburgh
1st January 1975
{87}
INQUIRY
@Luke 2:46-51; @Psalm 27:4; @Isaiah 21:11,12; @2 Samuel 20:15-20
These scriptures present the importance of inquiry.  It is a feature that is proper to manhood according to God.  The attitude of inquiry involves dependence, it includes the idea that we need to learn, and as long as we are here, no matter how old we are, we are always learning and we always need to learn.  If the trust that we were speaking of is rightly to be fulfilled by any of us there will be the need to maintain the attitude of inquiry.  We can be so fixed at times in our outlook and in our ideas, which is not proper to manhood.  The attitude of inquiry is a receptive attitude.  It is an attitude that would be ready to receive anything that God may say to us about any matter and is important for each one of us to maintain individually and locally when we come together.  There should be always with us the attitude of inquiry.
This attitude is very attractive when it is seen in the Lord Jesus Himself.  In this chapter two of the gospel of Luke we have presented to us Jesus as a boy of twelve with his parents.  Some here may be about twelve.  What a model Jesus is!  Young persons here, Jesus was once your age.  What a wonderful thing to contemplate Him here, perfect in flesh and blood condition, brought up at Nazareth, living in the household of His parents, and Jesus one of that household.  What an example for young persons in households.  Maybe sometimes they, as we all have, rebel against certain restrictions which are for our blessing to accept.  There were never any of these features with Jesus.  It was a poor household; when it came to a certain offering required, the offering of lesser value was offered (@Luke 2:24; @Leviticus 12:8) which would indicate that the household had not much material resource.  It would not be a home such as we live in, dear brethren.  His parents went up yearly at the feast of the Passover, and when Jesus was twelve years old they went up to Jerusalem according to the custom of the feast and the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem.  Think of Jesus as a boy of twelve, already committed to His Father's business, rejoicing to go up to Jerusalem.  The psalmist said, "I rejoiced when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of Jehovah.  Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem", @Psalm 122:1,2.  Think of Jesus as a boy of twelve
{88}
anticipating going up and His feet actually standing within the gates of Jerusalem!  What God purposed regarding Jerusalem, and will yet be fulfilled, even regarding the earthly Jerusalem, would come into the heart and mind of the Lord Jesus as a boy of twelve.
As His parents returned, Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem.  They went a day's journey supposing He was amongst their acquaintances and friends.  "And it came to pass, after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers and hearing them and asking them questions".  Think of Jesus asking questions.  We would have to view this setting of the temple and teachers as normal.  There was the abnormal side where the doctors of the law were sitting by, critical of the actions of the Lord Jesus in chapter 5, but here we would have to regard.  This was normal, just as in chapter 1 there was normal priestly service, Zacharias being in the temple in his course.  We were speaking about the failures which took place between what was established by David and Samuel the seer, and what was recovered in the time of Nehemiah (see @1 Chronicles 9:22).  There were many serious lapses also between the recovery in the book of Nehemiah and the history recorded in the first chapter of Luke.  There were over four hundred years of history, some very sad history; there was actually idolatry set up in the temple during that time.  What a lapse that was, but you come to the first chapter of Luke verse five and you find the course of Abia functioning as set on by David in 1 Chronicles 24:11.  The line comes right through.
So in chapter 2 there are these teachers: "sitting in the midst of the teachers and hearing them and asking them questions".  I suppose in our day teachers would be scarce.  Thank God we have teaching, and there is printed teaching, but teachers are scarce.  We are not living in a time when gift is prominent.  I do not think persons could be named as teachers today.  We are not living in that kind of time but in a time when things are more mutual, and we help each other.  We need to help each other because there is not the distinctiveness there has been previously.  Nevertheless there is to be in our localities the element of teaching.  The Lord Jesus Himself as a boy of twelve was sitting in the midst of the teachers and hearing them and asking them questions.  It is an attitude of dependent manhood here; He asked questions of teachers in the temple.  What a model for us, dear brethren!  "And all who heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers".  We are not
{89}
surprised that those who heard Him were astonished at His understanding and answers, knowing who He is, knowing the perfection of His committal, but we might be surprised that He was hearing the teachers and asking them questions.  It would no doubt emphasise the importance of this attitude of inquiry.  So when we come together we do not come together to teach exactly, we come together to inquire and there is help in every occasion as we inquire.  The Lord Jesus said "Why is it that ye have sought me?  did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" He was already committed to His Father's business.  The more we are committed to the Father's business, and the more we accept being entrusted with the things of God, the more we will need the feature of inquiry, and make use of everything that can help us, and anyone that can help us.  Then He went down with them and came to Nazareth and He was in subjection to them.  Jesus, committed to His Father's business, was in subjection to His parents in Nazareth.  How beautiful it is!  How attractive it makes this matter of inquiry, I trust, to each one of us!
Now @Psalm 27, a psalm of David, is in a section which begins in @Psalm 25.  It has been suggested that this section of Psalms may have been written during the time of the rebellion of Absalom, and David was in exile, and some of his inward feelings are expressed.  It says in this verse we have read "One thing have I asked of Jehovah, that will I seek after".  You remember when he accepted exile and left Jerusalem and Zadok and the priests brought the ark to be with David in exile, he said "Carry back the ark of God into the city.  If I shall find favour in the eyes of Jehovah, he will bring me again, and show me it, and its habitation", 2 Sam 15:25.  David says here "One thing have I asked of Jehovah, that will I seek after: that I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of Jehovah; and to inquire of him in his temple".  It is a longing he has to get into normal conditions, and the privilege of inquiring of Him.  It is the one thing that occupies David's mind and heart here.  If he is in exile when he writes this you can understand how he would value the privilege he once had, and pray that it should be restored to him.  What a privilege we have in an area like this!  How privileged we are to have meetings of this kind, to have occasions of fellowship, to be in localities close to other localities!  We are not in outposts; there are the outposts.
{90}
If we are to experience temple conditions there must be with us the attitude of inquiry.  The temple of God is where the Spirit of God is, but even if persons who are indwelt by the Spirit come together without the attitude of inquiry there would not be temple conditions.  There needs to be this attitude of inquiry with us.  We are thankful for help we get when we come together in occasions such as we had before we had this one, but I sometimes wonder if such occasions could be even more profitable, because the more we are coloured by the attitude of inquiry the more profitable these occasions will be because, the Spirit dwelling here in the temple, there is the answer to any genuine inquiry.  What is needed on our side is this attitude of inquiry.  We do not come together as knowing everything; we come together as inquirers.  Some might know more than others, but it is not a matter of knowledge in any case, it is a matter of what the Lord might say and what God might say to us whether we are a large number locally or whether we are few.  Temple conditions do not depend on numbers; I believe temple conditions depend on the attitude of the persons, and if the attitude is one of inquiry we will get more and more help in our occasions of gathering, because there is no limit to the help available to us.  There needs to be the receptive inquiring attitude on our part.  We do not just come together to talk about the scriptures, we come together to inquire as to what the Lord would say to us on any particular occasion.  He is more ready to speak to us than we are to inquire.  The need is on our side for this attitude of inquiry.  May we be alerted and have more of this spirit of inquiry that there might be divine answers coming to us.
The book of Isaiah consists of a large number of prophecies, and we have the advantage in Mr Darby's translation of indications of when the prophecies start and finish.  Some of the prophecies consist of one chapter, some consist of a number of chapters; this one we have read consists of two verses, but it is a prophecy of Isaiah, by itself, which would remind us of the need to be available to answer inquiry, and to be on the outlook for inquiring persons.  Not only do we need to have the attitude of inquiry ourselves but we need to be on the outlook for persons who are inquiring.  This is the burden of Dumah: "He called to me out of Seir".  Who is the 'me'?  It might be Isaiah himself.  Isaiah's experiences come into his prophecies more than perhaps we realise.  He makes several references to himself and how he felt in certain circumstances.  He had to walk barefoot and naked for instance in chapter twenty, as indicated of God.  Here Isaiah writes "he calleth to
{91}
me out of Seir".  The call is "Watchman, what of the night?  Watchman, what of the night?"  We need to be watchmen, on the outlook for persons who are inquiring.  The inquiry is "What of the night?".  There are many around us in conditions of night, in darkness; we know something ourselves of that darkness.  Paul wrote in the first chapter of Colossians: "Who has delivered us from the authority of darkness".  I have no doubt that around us there are dear souls held in the authority of darkness.  It is something where Satan has a foothold, where he has authority over the conscience.  The consciences of persons are under an authority, but it is not of God, it is the authority of darkness.  It is a very solemn thing and we have known something of it.  Thank God that we have been delivered from it: "Who has delivered us from the authority of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love".  The authority of darkness would be like the night.  "What of the night?"  "Watchman", it is repeated "What of the night?"  Persons may be living near to us under this authority, there may be some longing with them.  Would we be in an attitude of watchmen?  Would we be ready to answer any inquiry?  "And the watchman said, The morning cometh, and also the night: if ye will inquire, inquire; return, come".  Through divine mercy some of us have known something of what the morning is.  There is life and love and liberty and hope in the shining of the sun; how good to come into the morning!  Do not let us forget there are persons who are still in the night and let us be available.  Peter speaks about "sanctify the Lord the Christ in your hearts, and be always prepared to give an answer to every one that asks you to give an account of the hope that is in you" @1 Peter 3:15.  It is somebody who understands the morning light and hope and is prepared to give an answer.  He is like a watchman, he is testifying in his behaviour that he has hope.  He is not in the night, he is not under the authority of darkness, he is in the kingdom of the Son of His love and, because he is expressing something of that morning, he arouses inquiry and is "always prepared to give an answer to every one that asks you to give an account of the hope that is in you, but with meekness and fear"; not in any boasting attitude, not in an attitude taking any credit to ourselves but in meekness and fear.  This brings before us the idea of the watchman on the outlook.  Habakkuk takes up his stand upon his watch tower, see Hab 2:1.  We have often referred to part of the panoply in Ephesians 6: "shod your feet with the preparation of the glad tidings of peace", v 15.  Shod your feet, not just our minds, not just our hearts but our feet, which must involve movement.  Such would be available
{92}
to answer any inquiry.  It says here "if ye will inquire, inquire; return, come".  In the day in which we are there is a need for this attitude of the watchman being on the outlook for persons who are inquiring, who are troubled, who are burdened; and there must be many of them, persons who have misgivings, who wonder, who possibly did not know all the facts that we knew at a certain juncture.  Through mercy we are delivered, but let us never forget persons who are still in bondage and be ready to answer inquiries.
In 2 Samuel we have before us the importance of the attitude of inquiry when a difficulty arises.  We tend to jump to conclusions and we can be quite sure we have the right judgment, and so we pronounce it very often.  The need, dear brethren, is to inquire; whatever the difficulty may be, the need is to inquire.  There is a difficulty in this scripture, a very serious difficulty, and Joab proceeds to act.  Actually he was not commissioned to do this.  Amasa is recognised as the captain, and then Abishai is commissioned to see to this matter, but somehow Joab comes into it.  Joab is never far away when something like this arises.  They gather together and come and besiege this city Abel-Beth-Maacah and cast a bank against it.  They proceed to sap the wall, they proceed to destroy this city because of this difficulty that has arisen.  Joab makes no inquiry, he does not consult anyone, he proceeds to act on his own ideas; but there is a wise woman there.  "And a wise woman cried out of the city, Hear, hear: say, I pray you, unto Joab, Come near hither, that I may speak with thee".  This woman succeeded in getting Joab to listen.  One of the last things Joab would do is to listen.  Joab was acting here, proceeding according to his own mind, quite sure he has the answer, but she succeeds in getting this man to listen.  "Hear, hear; say, I pray you, unto Joab, Come near hither, that I may speak with thee.  And he came near to her; and the woman said, Art thou Joab?  And he said, I am he.  And she said to him, Listen to the words of thy handmaid.  And he said, I am listening".  If you get someone listening, even Joab listening, there is some hope of a settlement of things.  "I am listening", he says, and she spoke saying "They were wont to speak in old time saying, Just inquire in Abel".  Think of that word, "Just inquire"!  A difficulty arises -- just inquire!  There is need to have an open mind and to inquire -- just inquire.  "Just inquire in Abel; and so they ended".  We need, dear brethren, to develop this attitude of inquiry regarding any difficulty arising.  Difficulties are arising and difficulties will arise, but "Just inquire"; "Just inquire" before you come to a conclusion.
{93}
Fortunately, inquiring takes some time; there is time gained by inquiring.
I desire to draw attention to two incidents in the Old Testament.  The first is in Genesis 34 where there was the difficulty when Dinah the daughter of Leah went out to see the daughters of the land, and all of us would know the calamity that happened there.  This difficulty was answered violently, Simeon and Levi took the matter into their own hands.  There is no doubt that it was a wrong thing that was done, but Simeon and Levi made no inquiry; they did not ask Jacob what he thought about the matter.  They took the law into their own hands and acted so violently that sixty years afterwards the matter was still on the spirit of Jacob; he was still bearing the burden of what these sons Simeon and Levi did.  A wrong was done, there is no doubt that it was wrong, but their action was so violent that it brought in grief which remained for sixty years or so afterwards for when Jacob was blessing his sons he recalled to Simeon and Levi this incident.  We can make matters worse by an over-reaction to any difficulty that may happen.
The other incident is in the book of Joshua chapter 22, when the two and a half tribes had been with the other nine and a half tribes and the conquest of the land of Canaan had been completed, and the two and a half tribes were sent back to their own inheritance on the other side of the Jordan.  Before they went to their homes they built an altar of grand appearance.  The thing looked very bad.  A very serious view was taken of it in Israel.  When the children of Israel heard of it, the whole assembly of the children of Israel gathered together at Shiloh, to go up against them to war, v 12.  Such was their answer to the difficulty and even Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest and the princes were in it.  "And they came to the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, to the land of Gilead, and spoke with them, saying, Thus saith the whole assembly of Jehovah: What wickedness is this which ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from following Jehovah, in that ye have built yourselves an altar, rebelling this day against Jehovah?", vv 15, 16.  They pronounced it wickedness and rebellion and turning away from God.  That is what is pronounced by even Phinehas, the son of Eleazar; and they go on to refer to precedents, which are often referred to when difficulties happen.  "Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us?"  They would say this is just Peor all over again.  Then they refer to Achan's
{94}
sin. We have these kinds of things said when difficulties arise.  Immediately we jump to conclusions and say this is Glanton over again, or some other issue over again.  After they have said all this and after they have given their conclusion about it, and called it wickedness and rebellion, they find that there is an explanation, so that it says in verse 30 that when they "heard the words that the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the children of Manasseh spoke, it was good in their sight".  There was an explanation for it, you see.  The thing was good in the sight of the children of Israel.  It says in verse 33 "And the thing was good in the sight of the children of Israel, and the children of Israel blessed God, and no more said that they would go up in warfare against them, to destroy the land".  It was explained.  It was not on a very high level, it was on a low level; nevertheless it was accepted.  In fact they said it was good.  The idea was that they were so far from Jerusalem that they should have an altar just to prove that Jehovah was their God.  It was a very poor thing, and yet it was an explanation which was accepted and instead of war, there was peace restored.  It came through inquiry.  They inquired.  They would have been better to inquire first, before they made their pronouncements, but anyway they inquired afterwards and it was accepted.  We had a word on Tuesday night as to our reactions when certain things happen.  Maybe the Lord allows certain things to happen to test our reactions.  We are always being tested as to what our reactions are to certain things that happen.  We are safe, dear brethren, to inquire and to keep inquiring, and the Lord will answer true inquiry and genuine earnest prayer to Him.
May the Lord help us to value the attitude of inquiry and to be maintained in it that we may prove trustworthy as to what is committed to us.
Sunbury
22nd February 1975
{95}
THE WAITING TIME
@Acts 1:14
It is very desirable that exercises should be completed; but sometimes we have to wait, and I am thinking of the importance of the waiting time.  The persons we have read about in Acts 1 were waiting.  The Lord told them, according to @Luke 24:49, to "remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high".  In verse 4 of the chapter from which we read, the Lord "commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to await the promise of the Father, which said he ye have heard of me".  These persons therefore were waiting for something to be completed.
The idea of waiting is interesting, because the whole dispensation of Christianity is, in a certain sense, a waiting time.  It comes between the Lord leaving His own and His return.  What saints have waited for right down through more than nineteen centuries has been the Lord's return; therefore, in a broad sense, we are in a waiting time.  The waiting time is the time of testimony, the time of learning, the time of growth.  When the waiting time is over we will have no more part in testimony as we have now, and there will be no more growth.  Therefore the waiting time is a very important time.  Our period of active testimony is a very short one.  Some who have gone before us in the great testimony of God had their part for a much longer time in the testimony.  Enoch, for instance, walked with God for three hundred years.  Others in that line of testimony in Genesis chapter 5 lived many years and had their part in the testimony for centuries.  Our time is quite brief, but it is very important.
Now besides the general idea of being in a waiting time there are certain exercises in which we have to wait for completion.  Certain of our brethren have exercises they carry in prayer every day before God, and there are household exercises.  There are local exercises, matters which have been outstanding for months; there seems to be as yet no solution and therefore we are in a waiting time; but the Lord intends that the waiting time should be profitable, that spiritual gain should come during the waiting time.  The Lord Himself waits.  When He was here He could say prophetically "I waited patiently for Jehovah; and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry", @Psalm 40:1.  Think of the Lord Jesus as a dependent Man waiting on God!  Even in His present position He
{96}
is waiting.  Paul writes to the Thessalonians of "the patience of the Christ", @2 Thessalonians 3:5.  He is waiting the moment of which we sometimes sing: 'the Father's perfect time', when the Spirit's work will be completed and the assembly will be raptured to be with Him for ever.
What is specially in mind is the waiting time in relation to certain exercises.  The persons here "gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer".  It does not say what they were praying about.  Later in this chapter, when they were to appoint one to replace Judas, there was specific prayer; but "these gave themselves... to continual prayer" is not a specific request being made; it is an attitude.  How comely for us in the waiting time to have the attitude of prayer!  "Pray unceasingly", Paul exhorts (@1 Thessalonians 5:17); that would be an attitude of implicit confidence in and dependence on God.  "These gave themselves... to continual prayer"; the waiting time was a profitable time, it was a time when persons were ready and became suited vessels to receive the Holy Spirit at Pentecost.
In chapter 9 of this book Saul of Tarsus "was three days without seeing, and neither ate nor drank" (v 9); he was waiting.  Ananias had to be adjusted.  He was a pious man, he was a disciple, no doubt one who carried some responsibility in Damascus, but he had to be adjusted, and Saul of Tarsus had to wait while Ananias was being adjusted.  The Lord said to him "Seek in the house of Judas one by name Saul, he is of Tarsus: for, behold, he is praying".  Saul of Tarsus spent the waiting time in prayer.  It does not say what he was praying for; he was in that attitude of prayer.  The waiting time until Ananias arrived (by his visit Saul received the Spirit and came into fellowship) was not lost, something was gained; the waiting time was profitable: "Behold, he is praying".  When Ananias was adjusted he was able to go and lay his hands upon him; he laid his hands upon a praying man.  Not only was he a converted man, not only was he affected by the objective view he had of the Lord Jesus personally, but there is a certain attitude in him: he was praying.  The waiting time, dear brethren, is meant to sober us.  It is meant to modify our outlook, to soften our outlook; that whereas there might have been extremes of view, the waiting time, as used of the Lord, would bring us together, especially if we are in the attitude of prayer, and seeking the Lord's mind.  It is not a question of everyone coming round to my view but of all gradually, as utilising the waiting time, coming round to the Lord's view; and so we shall be directed
{97}
towards unity.  Certain exercises exist at the present time; there is waiting, but the waiting time is meant to be profitable.  I am certain the Lord intends this.
In chapter 10 the Spirit has in view a certain movement of the testimony, and Peter has an extreme view which is opposed to the view the Lord has.  The Lord has in mind that the testimony should go out to the nations; Peter had other thoughts, and he is quite entrenched in his thoughts, and no doubt he could quote scripture to support them.  He could refer to the Old Testament and how God confined His dealings to the nation of Israel.  No doubt he could prove from scripture that his view was right.  But Peter has to be adjusted, and he puts himself in the way of adjustment by prayer.  It says, "Peter went up on the house to pray, about the sixth hour", v 9.  In that attitude of prayer Peter put himself in the way of receiving adjustment.  We can be quite adamant and others may think the way we think, and so it builds us up in our own adamant attitude.  Peter put himself in the way of being adjusted by going up on the house to pray, and the Spirit took advantage of Peter's attitude to adjust him.  He was not easily adjusted; it would seem that the vision had to take place three times before he got the point of it, but he did get the point of it, and he was adjusted.  He put himself in the way of adjustment by being in the attitude of prayer.  He did not go to pray, as far as we read, for any specific thing; it is the attitude of prayer.  Oh!  what value it would be for everyone of us, indeed for those who walk in the truth universally, if in the waiting time we were concerned to be in the attitude of prayer and getting the Lord's mind about a particular matter, or about any matter.  Thus would the unity of the Spirit be kept in the uniting bond of peace.  While we look for completed exercises, sometimes we have to wait for exercises being completed, and the waiting time is no doubt allowed of the Lord that we might come round and be directed towards unity.
In chapter 13, in Antioch we find there were persons who were ministering to the Lord and fasting.  It does not seem clear to me whether it was the whole assembly who were ministering and fasting, but certainly these five prophets and teachers were ministering to the Lord and fasting.  The Holy Spirit was looking for vessels to use in the great outgoing work of the testimony and He found available, without requiring to be adjusted, just available to hand, two vessels who were in this attitude of ministering to the Lord and fasting.
{98}
May the Lord help us to get into this attitude that we all may be preserved together, not only in this city but universally, for the Lord's own Name's sake.
Edinburgh
9th September 1975
{99}
HOW PAUL PRESENTS HIMSELF TO THE CORINTHIANS
@1 Corinthians 3:9-11; @1 Corinthians 4:14-17; @1 Corinthians 7:40; @1 Corinthians 9:19; @1 Corinthians 15:58
These verses indicate some of the ways in which Paul presented himself to the Corinthians.  He was known to the saints in Corinth, and they were known to him, because he had lived there for eighteen months.  His presentation of himself would therefore be supported by what the Corinthians knew Paul to be.  He presents himself in a way that would help the Corinthians.  The Corinthians needed adjustment, help, and instruction, just as in our localities there is similar need.  Although Paul was an apostle, some features in which he presents himself in this epistle could in some measure be taken on by us in our localities.
In chapter 1 Paul presents himself as an apostle.  He says, "Paul, a called apostle of Jesus Christ, by God's will" (@1 Corinthians 1:1), which would be unique to Paul.  He had official authority as an apostle.  That would not obtain today, but he also presents himself in other features which in measure, I believe, could be taken on by us.
In chapter 3 he presents himself as a wise architect which would be special to Paul too, but it would be a good question to ask ourselves what is the end in view in our activities, our desires, and our prayers in our localities.  Paul's activities in Corinth were governed by the light that he had as an architect.  He could see what God had in mind in that locality.  He had the view of God's building, for His pleasure, in which God could dwell.  Paul refers to a shrine, a temple, where God's presence would be known, where light would shine and God's mind would be known.  Paul as the wise architect had all this in mind when he preached and taught in Corinth.  He says, "We are God's fellow-workmen".  He and those with him worked together in view of arriving at God's objective in that locality.  It is a great matter, dear brethren, to have God's objective in any activity we undertake.  Paul laid the foundation in keeping with his understanding as an architect.  What he laid was the foundation, but the foundation conformed to the structure that the architect had in mind.  He says here, "According to the grace of God which has been given to me, as a wise architect, I have laid the foundation, but another builds upon it".
{100}
He exhorts others to build according to that foundation.  The foundation was laid with the architect's view of the building in mind; they were to conform to the foundation which was laid there.  "I have laid the foundation, but another builds upon it.  But let each see how he builds upon it.  For other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ".  It is another order of Man that Paul laid as the foundation at Corinth, Jesus Christ.  He tells us earlier in the epistle "And I, when I came to you, brethren, came not in excellency of word, or wisdom, announcing to you the testimony of God.  For I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and him crucified" (@1 Corinthians 2:1, 2).  He had in mind to lay the foundation in Corinth in accord with another order of Man.  That is what our local assemblies are to be.  They are to be conformed to another kind of Man, Jesus Christ.  Nothing of the first man, and nothing of the man after the flesh was to enter into this structure that Paul had in mind as a wise architect, and therefore he laid the foundation.
Others were building upon it and they were not all building in keeping with the foundation.  We need therefore to be watchful in our localities.  How important it is to have a right objective in all our activities locally, in measure the objective Paul had in his labours in Corinth.  He would discount every other man, no matter how eloquent, no matter what personal appeal they might have in human wisdom or that kind of thing.  Paul laid the foundation, which is Jesus Christ, and he exhorts others to build according to the foundation he had laid.  How important, therefore, to have some idea of what we are working for, what we are praying for, and the end to which we are labouring.  Paul had this objective at Corinth as a wise architect.  Everything was to conform to God's own thought, God's pleasure in another Man, Jesus Christ.
In the tabernacle of old the boards were of acacia wood.  They were of the same kind of wood as the ark.  That was the structure that supported the curtains in the tabernacle of which Moses was the architect as Paul was the architect at Corinth.  It is all in view of another kind of Man, Jesus Christ.  Let us judge every feature of the first man and of the man after the flesh so that we are building according to the foundation.
Now in chapter 4 Paul presents himself as a father.  He says, "I think that God has set us the apostles for the last, as appointed to death.  For we have become a spectacle to the world, both to angels and men",
{101}
@1 Corinthians 4:9.  The fact is that the Corinthians' father, Paul, was under reproach and suffering and the Corinthians were not faithful children of their father.  They were considering for themselves.  Paul says, "Already ye are filled; already ye have been enriched; ye have reigned without us; and I would that ye reigned, that we also might reign with you", @1 Corinthians 4:8.  "We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye prudent in Christ -- we weak, but ye strong -- ye glorious, but we in dishonour", @1 Corinthians 4:10.  Paul and Sosthenes were persecuted and insulted, while the Corinthians were enriched and were reigning; they were not true children of their father.  So he says to them, "Not as chiding do I write these things to you, but as my beloved children I admonish you".
What a powerful appeal he made to these Corinthians!  Their behaviour was not in keeping with the conduct of their father.  We often quote this scripture, "Yet not many fathers", and that would be true that there are not many fathers.  The fact is that the Corinthians had one father, Paul.  He says, "For if ye should have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the glad tidings".  He had the right to claim them as his children, being an apostle.  No one could claim today to be a father as Paul was, but there is plenty of room for fatherly affections, fatherly influence, and fatherly appeal to young people and to the saints locally and generally.  The feelings and affections of a father are needed.  What a powerful appeal this would make to the Corinthians and, to complete it, he sent Timotheus.  He said to the Corinthians, "Not as chiding do I write these things to you, but as my beloved children I admonish you", but he says regarding Timotheus, "For this reason I have sent to you Timotheus, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord".  He could not say to the Corinthians, 'You are my beloved and faithful children', but he could say that in regard of Timotheus.  Nevertheless, he appeals to them as, "My beloved children".  Even if they were not representing their father, even if they were not the faithful reproduction of their father, they certainly were beloved, and Paul's fatherly affection came through and had its weight with these persons in Corinth.  No one could have said, 'Paul, you were not always like a father'.  He had been eighteen months among them and he had been like a father.  What they knew of him would support what he writes here.
Then he says, "I entreat you therefore, be my imitators".  Paul as a father represented in Corinth what all the saints should be.  What a test
{102}
that is! -- to represent locally what the Lord intends all the saints should arrive at.  That is what Paul represents.  It is a very, very testing matter, but not an impossible one.  In fact there would be some shortcoming in our prayers for our local brethren if the one who prayed did not somewhat represent what he was praying about for others.  Paul represented what God intended all the saints in Corinth to arrive at, and he represented it in fatherly affection and fatherly influence, "I entreat you therefore, be my imitators".  Then he sent to them Timotheus, one who was his imitator, one who was his beloved and faithful child, showing that it is not impossible to be a faithful representation of Paul, to have Paul's outlook, and feelings and affections.  Paul's appeal was reinforced by the presence amongst them of Timothy.  The saints would look at Timothy and say, 'He is a faithful representation of Paul himself.  We had forgotten what Paul was like, but here he is, represented in this young man'.  So a young man can take up this attitude that Timothy had here in representing fatherly features.  We have to learn to be sons before we can be fathers.  We have to learn to be children before we can be parents, and Timothy no doubt learned to be a child of Paul and therefore could faithfully represent him.
Now in chapter 7 Paul presents himself as one who has God's Spirit.  You might say that every believer normally has the Spirit of God, and that would be true, but Paul says here, "I think that I also have God's Spirit".  Not only had he received the Holy Spirit of God, but he had been formed by God's Spirit.  This chapter deals largely with the matter of marriage, but apart from what it deals with it is interesting to take note of how Paul speaks about himself.  He says, for instance, in @1 Corinthians 7:10, "But to the married I enjoin, not I, but the Lord"; that is, he emphasises what is the Lord's commandment, what it is obligatory on the part of every one to be subject to.  Then he says in verse 12, "But as to the rest, I say, not the Lord"; that is, he goes on to speak of what he could not say specifically was the Lord's commandment, but what he said.  No doubt, as having God's Spirit, he was qualified to say certain things.
It is good to accept direction from persons who have God's Spirit.  As having God's Spirit, Paul's judgment is reliable.  He says, "According to my judgment; but I think that I also have God's Spirit"; it is his judgment as having God's Spirit.  So he could say, "I say, not the Lord".  He could not exactly say, 'This is a matter which is the Lord's
{103}
commandment and is obligatory and laid upon you to answer to'.  Who in Corinth or elsewhere would disregard what Paul said?  Who in our localities would disregard what one who has God's Spirit says is his judgment? -- How important this is.  We find salvation in the area where persons who have God's Spirit would give their judgment.  Not that anyone is to be absolutely trusted; only the Lord is, and the Lord's commandment is obligatory.  Nevertheless, Paul says, "I say, not the Lord".  There are many references of this kind in this chapter.
Paul says in verse 25, "I give my opinion".  He gives his opinion as one who has God's Spirit.  He was a spiritual man.  If we have such persons amongst us -- and we speak to young people here, as well as older ones -- we do well to listen to them.  We might be saved many a sorrow if we listened to persons who would give their opinion as having God's Spirit.  What a desirable objective it would be on the part of every one of us to have God's Spirit characteristically.  It would come through giving place to the Spirit of God, being formed by the Spirit of God, so that we have the judgment God would have without being told directly what God's judgment is.
The Lord's commandment is specific and obligatory, but then there is the Lord's mind.  I have no doubt that "My opinion", as Paul said, would be the Lord's mind, and so he says in the last verse, "According to my judgment" -- the judgment of one who has God's Spirit.
In John 14 the Lord speaks about His commandments, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me" (John 14:21), and then He goes on to speak about "My word", "If any one love me, he will keep my word", v 23.  Then He speaks about "My words", v 24.  Now the Lord's commandment would be "Not I, but the Lord", but then His mind would come in through persons who have God's Spirit.  We need to recognise where persons who have God's Spirit would give their opinion, their judgment.  We would find salvation, beloved brethren, in listening and being subject to such persons.  Therefore Paul presents himself to the Corinthians as having God's Spirit.  Besides his apostleship and the authority that he had, there is what the man was morally, formed morally as having God's Spirit.  What room there is in our localities for persons who have God's Spirit!  What an objective it should be on the part of every one of us to be formed in God's Spirit, because matters come up where judgment is needed,
{104}
where opinions need to be expressed.  How important that those who express their opinion, or give their judgment, should have God's Spirit.
In chapter 9 Paul presents himself as being free from all.  He was under obligation to no one.  He had no special friends, he had no party affiliations, nothing of that kind.  He was free from all.  His obligation was to his Lord and Master.  He tells us (@1 Corinthians 9:9) that even the ox that trod the corn had certain rights; even the plougher had certain rights, but he says in verse 15, "I have used none of these things".  He had served at Corinth, and was serving them now in this letter, under obligation to no one.  "Being free from all, I have made myself bondman to all".  What a man he was!  What an influence he had!  This is what the man was morally.  He had only one loyalty and that was to the Lord Jesus, his Master.  How important that each one of us should be like this!  You can scarcely lift a volume of Mr Taylor's ministry without there being some reference in it to the dangers of partisanship and special friendships.  That dear servant laboured at this matter.  He could see the danger.
Paul was free from all, under obligation to no one.  He did not look for credit, nor did he look for approval.  He did not look for any personal advantage; nothing of that kind marked the labours of Paul in Corinth and elsewhere.  Thus, as looking for nothing in return, he was free from all in order to be more fully available as the bondman of all.  "For being free from all, I have made myself bondman to all, that I might gain the most possible".  Oh how large was Paul's outlook!  We need to have our outlook enlarged that we might gain the most possible.  I am calling attention to these features in which Paul presents himself to the Corinthians, and his presentation in his letter would be supported by what they knew the man to be.  Alas, very few of us have been consistent.  Paul was, and his consistency no doubt would have weight in the letter he wrote.  How inconsistent we have been!  How we departed, to our shame, from what we were brought to know as the truth!  Even so, we can repent of all our diversions, of all our failures; we can repent of all, and as we thoroughly repent we can be morally clear.  Where there has been failure and repentance the Lord can take account of what a man has been in the main objective of his life; but Paul had not deviated.  Paul was consistent; "Being free from all, I have made myself bondman to all".  He was more completely a bondman to all because he was free from all, under no influence and no obligation, and at no personal advantage.
{105}
Now in the last scripture we read Paul appeals to the Corinthians as a brother.  He says, "So then, my beloved brethren".  We use this expression, "Beloved brethren", somewhat frequently in addressing the saints, but Paul uses this language very sparingly.  He wrote to the Philippians, "My brethren, beloved and longed for, my joy and crown" (Phil 4:1), but apart from that I do not know of anywhere else where Paul says, "My beloved brethren".  He appeals as a brother, and how important that is in our links together as brethren, including, of course, sisters.  There will come a day when the wise architect will be no longer needed, and being bondman to all will no longer be needed; but the brother will go through into eternity.  It belongs to the divine family.  So Paul says, "my beloved brethren".  He had said in @1 Corinthians 4, "My beloved children".  That is a father.  That too will cease -- Paul will not be a father in eternity, but he will be a brother.  He says, "So then, my beloved brethren, be firm, immovable, abounding always in the work of the Lord, knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord".  It comes at the end of a great opening up of teaching.  Paul wrote in chapter 1, "But of him" (that is, God) "are ye in in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness" (or sanctification) "and redemption", @1 Corinthians 1:30.  He has gone over all this ground in this epistle, and after concluding with the great matter of redemption, including resurrection, he says, "So then, my beloved brethren", @1 Corinthians 15:58.  He is alongside of these persons in Corinth as one of them.  He says, "Be firm, immovable, abounding always".  They can have confidence that the work of the Lord is going to go through.  The very teaching of resurrection would show that everything is going through.  "Abounding always" -- not only abounding, but "abounding always in the work of the Lord, knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord".
I believe that these ways in which Paul presents himself to the Corinthians can be in measure taken on by each one of us so that a right influence is brought to bear locally and that conditions may improve for the glory and pleasure of God.  May it be so for His Name's sake.
Southend-on-Sea
25th October 1975
{106}
CLEAR VISION
@John 9:38; @Mark 8:22-26
Manifestation as it was considered in the previous meeting is from the divine side.  The Lord manifesting His glory is obviously from His side.  The works of God manifested in a man is also from the side of divine operations, so that there is the manifestation of something here.  I desire to say something now about our side, because manifestation is one thing, but it is another thing to have eyes to see it.  Our side is having eyes to see, and thus the ability to apprehend divine movements.  The Lord might manifest His glory and there may be some persons who would see it and appreciate it, and there may be some who would not see it.  The feast-master in John 2 saw the results, but did not know the secret.  The servants knew.  The mother of Jesus had eyes to see -- she knew what was going on.  The feast-master did not have eyes to see; he gives the credit to the bridegroom.  How important it is therefore that we should have eyes to see, that our sight should be operative, and that we are no longer blind.
We are all blind by nature.  None of us would have any apprehension or appreciation of divine manifestation naturally.  It needs a divine work that we might have our eyes opened to see.  The Lord says here in John 9 to the Pharisees, "Ye say, We see".  One of the greatest difficulties that we as believers have to face is that we think we see.
We say, 'We see', therefore we remain blind.  We just need to take account of our own histories to prove how often we have missed the Lord's manifestation because we have said, 'We see'.  The Pharisees in this chapter had their own ideas, their own set-up, their own religion, everything according to their own mind.  They said, 'We see'.  If we are to have our eyes opened, dear brethren, to any of the Lord's operations at the present time we have to come to it that we do not see.  If we say, 'We see', be sure we remain blind.  There are plenty around us who say they see.  I do not desire to be personal but there are many persons who say, 'We see'.  If we have come at all into the light it is because we have had to admit that we do not see.  This man in John 9 did not say, 'I see'; he became the subject of the Lord's operations so that he did see.  One of the greatest obstacles to our seeing is that we are content with our own ideas.  We say, 'We see'.
Now we come to this incident in Mark's gospel of a man who was blind.  It says the Lord "comes to Bethsaida; and they bring him a blind man, and beseech him that he might touch him".  This man did not say, 'I see'.  He did not claim anything; he was willing to be the subject of the Lord's own gracious operations.  There was no rebellion with him; he did not impose his thoughts in any way; he just became the subject of the Lord's movements and activities towards him.  It says they "beseech him that he might touch him.  And taking hold of the hand of the blind man...".  Think of that!  If we want to see divine operations, we have completely to submit ourselves under the Lord's hand.  He took hold of him by the hand.  We read in Hebrews 2:16, "He does not indeed take hold of angels by the hand, but he takes hold of the seed of Abraham".  Oh how good to be taken hold of by the hand by the Lord Himself!  How different from saying, 'We see'.  We do not help by argument persons who say they see, no matter how clear the arguments are, no matter how confirmed is the one who argues.  What is needed is to submit oneself to the Lord Himself.  "Taking hold of the hand of the blind man" was the beginning of the Lord's operations with him.  I wonder if we have all submitted to being taken hold of by the hand, young people here included.  He will take you on in this way if you are subject, if you are willing.  He will take you by the hand.  You may have life before you, and it may seem uncertain, as it must be in a world like this.  Older ones who may be in failing health, and may be nearing the end of their journey here, the Lord would take by the hand.  Oh what a Priest He is!  He is always available, ever living to intercede for us, ever thinking of us, ever ready to consider for us in every detail.  It says, "Taking hold of the hand of the blind man".  That is the first step.  Would you like to see the Lord when He manifests Himself, when He manifests His glory?  Would you like to be one who manifests the works of God down here?  This is the only way to it.  This man was submissive to have his hand taken hold of by the Lord Jesus.
If the Lord takes hold of your hand, where will He lead you?  He led this man out of the village, out of the influence of the village.  There is city life and there is village life.  In a city you could live near to someone for twenty years and not even know his name, but in a village everybody knows everybody.  It is a closely-knit social community.  The Lord took him by the hand and led him forth out of the village, out of every other influence to be alone with Himself.  This blind man was alone with the Lord.  Oh how important that is!  There may be persons around us who may be wondering where the Lord is.  They will not be helped by argument, neither will they be helped by going around to this place and that place.  The way that any of us will get help is to allow the Lord to take us by the hand and bring us out of every wrong influence to be alone in His own presence.  I have heard of young persons saying, 'How do I know which company is right?'.  I would like to say to such that if you are really interested to know what is right the Lord will show you.  The Lord will show you if you are prepared to let Him take hold of you by the hand and be alone with Him.  Nothing substitutes for being alone with the Lord.  I am not minimising the importance of meetings and ministry, because these will all help as we know what it is to be alone with the Lord, away from every other influence.
Then it says, "having spit upon his eyes".  What can anyone say about that?  Something is imparted from the Lord Himself.  Something is imparted from Jesus as a real Man, yet in His Person He is God.  His manhood is real.  The spittle of Jesus; how holy the matter is!  Something was in this world that was never here before, when Jesus became a Man.  Something existed for the pleasure of God that never existed before.  How wonderful is the incarnation!  The greatest thing that ever happened in this universe is that one of the holy Trinity became flesh and became available to men as a Man, available to men and women and young people.  Think of the Lord's interest to spit upon his eyes.  Something was imparted from Himself as this man was alone with Him.  This happened literally to this man; something corresponding to this happens when we are alone with Him, out of the range of every other influence.  He spat upon his eyes, and laid His hands upon him.  The Lord committed Himself to this blind man.  "He laid his hands upon him, and asked him if he beheld anything".  The man might have said, 'I see'.  He did not say 'I see'.  What he said was, "I behold men, for I see them, as trees, walking".  This man was honest.  He said exactly what he saw.  His vision was imperfect.  He might have said, 'I have all I want now, I can see', but he said, "I behold men, for I see them, as trees, walking".
Many of us have been like this man.  Just let us go over our histories not many years ago.  How true it is that we saw men as trees walking!  We had distorted vision, and it may be that we yet have distorted vision, for we are not all seeing eye to eye in everything.  I am being very practical, but it is the truth, therefore there must be some distorted vision somewhere.  It is not a question of everybody coming round to my view of things, or coming round to any man's view of things.  The secret is in allowing the Lord to take hold of us by the hand and lead us out of every other influence.  In a village there is a good deal of prejudice, a good deal of personal preference.  We need to get clear of every prejudice, every preference, and every such influence, and be alone with the Lord.  This man had vision basically, but it was distorted, and we all tend to have this kind of vision, but it says, "Then he laid his hands again upon his eyes".  This is often spoken of as the second touch, but it does not say that the Lord laid His hands upon his eyes a second time.  It says that He laid His hands again upon his eyes, not the second time, but again.  My impression is that we need the Lord to lay His hands upon our eyes over and over again because we become so easily distorted because of influences.
I think I am justified in saying this because if we follow the history of Peter after this incident we see that he needed not only a second touch but touch after touch.  What follows this incident is the Lord saying, "Who do men say that I am?", and Peter shows clear vision by saying "Thou art the Christ".  He can see clearly, but then just immediately afterwards the Lord said, "The Son of man must suffer many things", and "Peter, taking him to him, began to rebuke him".  Think of that!  Peter really said, 'I see', but Peter had distorted vision, and needed the Lord's hands again to be laid upon his eyes.  Then in the next chapter Peter, James and John are taken up to the mountain top, the place of great privilege, and Peter said, "Let us make three tabernacles, for thee one, and for Moses one, and for Elias one".  He sees men as trees walking, and he needs again the Lord's hands to be laid upon his eyes.  What we need, dear brethren, is the current laying on of the Lord's hands on our eyes in every situation that may arise.  It is not a once for all matter, nor is it only a second time matter -- it is a thing we need again and again.
The apostle Peter in the early chapters of the Acts was mightily used of the Lord, but when we come to Acts 10, where God has in mind that the gospel should be preached to Cornelius the gentile, Peter has to get a special revelation.  He has to see a certain vessel as a great sheet coming down out of heaven, and there was a voice saying, "Rise, Peter, slay and eat".  Peter said, "In no wise, Lord".  He thought he saw.  He would say, 'I see'.  His vision was so distorted that he required this to happen three times.  I am sure that over and over again in every current situation we need the Lord's laying of His hands on our eyes, and that involves the process of being taken hold of by the hand and being led out of the village.  We so tend to come under prejudice and personal preference or selfish interest that we need continually the Lord to lay His hands on our eyes.  "Then he laid his hands again upon his eyes, and he saw distinctly, and was restored and saw all things clearly".  Oh what a fine result that was!  I wonder if we are all like that.  I question myself if I am like that.  There is no reason why any of us should not see distinctly and be restored and see all things clearly.  He had seen distinctly before, apparently, but something had come in that needed the Lord to undertake all this service to him, and then he was restored and saw all things clearly.  Now he would be able to see the Lord manifesting His glory; he would be one who would manifest the works of God; he would be one who would be available for the Lord to manifest Himself to.  I trust this appeals to every one here.  I trust it proves to be attractive, so that we desire to be like this man and finish with saying, 'I see'; finish with laying down our own ideas and having our own thoughts and expecting everybody else to conform to them, and submit ourselves under the Lord's hands so that we may all see things clearly.
Now it says, "He sent him to his house, saying, Neither enter into the village, nor tell it to anyone in the village".  It is interesting how the Lord in Mark 7 and 8 charges persons.  It is a great matter to come under the Lord's charge.  In the previous chapter we have the deaf man who could not speak right.  The Lord, having spit, groaned and said, "Ephphatha, that is, Be opened".  The Lord felt the process with this man.  Then it says, "He charged them that they should speak to no one of it".  They are put under charge.  It is a great matter, dear brethren, to accept charge.  He charged them to speak to no one of it, but it says "so much the more he charged them, so much the more abundantly they proclaimed it".  We might think they did a good service.  It says, "They were astonished above measure, saying, He does all things well; he makes both the deaf to hear, and the speechless to speak".  We might have thought.  What a fine service!  Was it?  "He charged them that they should speak to no one of it".  It was contrary to what He had charged them.  We might think that they could not go wrong saying, "He does all things well", but they were not obedient to the charge.  It is a great matter to accept charge, to know what our charge is and to keep it.  The Lord knows better than we do.  We need to have our eyes opened, like this man in Mark 8, to know what the charge is, and to be obedient.  "He sent him to his house, saying, Neither enter into the village, nor tell it to anyone in the village".  The charge was definite and direct and we trust he accepted it.
Now in verse 29 of our chapter when Peter says, "Thou art the Christ", "He charged them straitly, in order that they should tell no man about him".  We are in the area here where the Lord is charging them, and if we are to be here for God's will, and for the glory and pleasure of our Lord Jesus Christ, we need to come under charge, know what our charge is, and fulfil it.  We are not to be left here to our own devices.  We are not here to do what we think best.  We had in the reading, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me".  "If any one love me, he will keep my word", John 14:21, 23.  It is a question of having the commandment and keeping it, and keeping His word.
Come under charge, accept responsibility, and be committed for the glory and pleasure of our Lord Jesus Christ.  May it be so on the part of everyone, for His Name's sake.
Peterhead
20th December 1975
{112}
EATING
@John 6:53-63; @Exodus 12:5-9; @Leviticus 10:16-20
These scriptures might help us to consider the great and important subject of eating.  I desire to speak not only of food but of eating certain food.  Every kind of food that is needed for the believer down here is available, but the question is whether we eat the food available to us.  No matter how large a spread anyone may have on the dining table, it will do no one any good unless it is eaten.  Eating is the responsibility of the person who is to be maintained in life, and where the constitution is normal the other processes are automatic.  But eating is of all importance.
John 6 begins with the feeding of the five thousand.  The Lord is able to give food to the crowd; He is able for numbers.  This sign introduces the Lord's teaching.  John does not write his gospel as a history; he writes to present the Lord's teaching.  The Lord speaks about Himself in verse 33, "The bread of God is he who comes down out of heaven and gives life to the world".  There could be no life in this world apart from the coming down of the Lord Jesus into manhood, into the condition of blood and flesh.  There is no life apart from that.  It is the attitude, the grace, of coming down out of heaven.  Think of the manhood of Jesus, dear brethren.  How wonderful it is!  He is a Man of another order.  He is a real Man, but He is not of Adam's fallen race.  He came down out of heaven, His manhood is real and yet of entirely another order.  He came into the condition in which we are, as we read this afternoon, "Since therefore the children partake of blood and flesh, he also, in like manner, took part in the same", Heb 2:14.  We have flesh and blood condition as our common lot; He took part in it, coming from heaven.  We sang about Him making Himself of no reputation.  Paul tells us in Philippians 2:7 that He "emptied himself".  It is this 'coming down' attitude, Paul writes to the Philippians, "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus; who, subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself", Phil 2:5-7.  Who could explain what that means?  He emptied Himself.  He divested Himself of the rightful dignity that belonged to Him, to come into a condition of blood and flesh.  What a stoop that was!  "The bread of God is he who comes down out of heaven and gives life to the world".  Then He says, "I am come down from heaven, not that I should do my will, but the will of him that has sent me", John 6:38.
We began to read where the Lord says, "Unless ye shall have eaten the flesh of the Son of man, and drunk his blood, ye have no life in yourselves".  The obligation is put on the believer, "Unless ye shall have eaten".  All that came into expression in the Lord Jesus in His perfection of life in blood and flesh here becomes available in His death.  In the sacrifices of old the animal had to be without blemish.  The blood of the animal was its life but it only became available on the death of the animal.  The fat of the animal was for God, but it only became available when the animal died.  Food is available for us, dear brethren, in the death of Christ.  He came into a body of blood and flesh, the condition in which we are, that there might be something for us beyond that condition.  He came into the condition of flesh and blood to end that condition.  There was no other way of ending it but that the Son of man should come down from heaven, come into the condition, and go into death to end that condition and open up another kind of life.  "Unless ye shall have eaten the flesh of the Son of man, and drunk his blood, ye have no life in yourselves.  He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life eternal".  Now this is intensely individual.  If we are going to continue in the testimony we need to appropriate this kind of food.  Do not say it is too difficult or too hard.
John in his gospel writes of crises, not exactly because of issues of the truth, or issues of righteousness, but tests as to whether persons are true disciples, whether persons have life in themselves.  It has been said that John writes to make believers out of believers; it could also be said that he writes to make disciples out of disciples.  In chapter 8 the Lord says, "If ye abide in my word, ye are truly my disciples" (John 8:31), not just disciples nominally, or merely professedly, but truly disciples.  This chapter appears difficult, but what I want to say is that there is such a thing as this kind of food provided for us, and it is essential to life that we should eat it.  "Unless ye shall have eaten the flesh of the Son of man, and drunk his blood, ye have no life in yourselves".  If therefore we are to be in life we must know something of appropriating by feeding on the death of our Lord Jesus Christ in this character.  "He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life eternal".  We speak about eternal life, and there was a conflict in the history of the testimony regarding it.  Now do we come into life eternal?  It is not apart from eating His flesh and drinking His blood.  "He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life eternal, and I will raise him up at the last day".  It looks right on to the end, right on to the first resurrection and the world to come.  He says, "for my flesh is truly food and my blood is truly drink".
I would like to interest the brethren here in this kind of food, and the essential need of eating it.  It will be the means of entrance into life out of death, into life according to God, eternal life, life to which death does not attach, to be enjoyed, to be experienced, now.  How does it come about?  By eating, appropriating this kind of food.  It will change our tastes; it will change our way of life.  You might be a nominal believer, a nominal disciple, and maybe not much different from a man in the world, but if you know what it is to eat His flesh and drink His blood you will be a real believer, and a real disciple, and you will know what eternal life is.  Eternal life is another area altogether in which you will find your life.  This food will change your tastes, your habits, and your whole way of life.  How essential that is!  It will result in an assembly outlook and life according to God.
The way to it is eating this kind of food, not only knowing about it, not only admiring it, but eating it.  The Lord says here, "He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him".  How great these statements are!  I am not able to say much about them, but I would like to interest everyone here.  There is such a food as this, but it must be eaten.  It will save us from being merely nominal.  John does not view believers as being in fellowship nominally, belonging to a certain company, or meeting in a certain room.  John views real believers as persons who eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of man.  Then the Lord says, "As the living Father has sent me and I live on account of the Father, he also who eats me shall live also on account of me".  What a standard that is!  Think of Jesus here living on account of the Father!  It is food which is available for us to eat, to appropriate, to get into our very beings, so that we are no longer governed by what is merely natural and what belongs to flesh and blood, but, while still in the condition of flesh and blood, we know a life that is outside of flesh and blood.  This is Christianity.  Eating His flesh and drinking His blood is the appropriation of the death of Christ, and eating "me" is appropriating Him where He is.
It includes appropriating the Lord Jesus as the Priest.  What we had in the reading was largely objective, to remind one another of the fact that there is such a One High Priest.  How attractive and available He is!  This is how we on our side, as eating, appropriate the Priest, "shall live also on account of me".  He becomes essential to our very lives.  He becomes indispensable to us.  How indispensable the Father was to Jesus here!  He who appropriates Jesus where He is will find Him indispensable.  He will live on account of Him.  The Lord said later on, in John 14:20, "In that day" -- that is, the day in which we are, the day of the Spirit -- "ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you".  How great these things are, but they are not beyond us.  This is something that is worth going in for.  It is not being attached to a certain company, and going to a certain room, or anything nominal.  It is what is real in the way of life, living, life according to God, life out of death, eternal life.
Then we find that "Many therefore of his disciples" -- His disciples, mark you; we have the crowd in this chapter, and we have the Jews who murmured, but here we have His disciples -- "having heard it said, This word is hard; who can hear it?".  We find later that, "From that time many of his disciples went away back and walked no more with him", John 6:66.  We find in our day that persons go away.  You might say, 'They did not see the issue of the truth', or 'They were not able to stand in the matter of righteousness'.  Maybe, dear brethren, they lacked the life which is presented here.  Let us commit ourselves to know more of this kind of food and be found in life here.  So the Lord says, "Does this offend you?  If then ye see the Son of man ascending up where he was before?".  Jesus, the Son of man, ascended up where He was before!  As Son of man the Lord Jesus came on man's side in order that men might live, in order that we might live.  He stooped, He emptied Himself, and came into the condition of blood and flesh, and died, and He has ascended up where He was before.  Then He says, "It is the Spirit which quickens, the flesh profits nothing".  The Son of man is ascended up where He was before, but the Spirit is here, available to us.  This section is intensely individual.  It is for each one of us, you and me.
When we come to Exodus 12 we have food that is eaten householdly.  It is the passover lamb.  The food that is presented here is the lamb "roast with fire; its head with its legs and with its inwards".  It presents the perfection of Jesus sustaining suffering on our account.  It is Jesus as the holy Sufferer, exposed to the wrath and judgment of God to which we were subject.  He was exposed to it.
It is the sufferings of Jesus on our account.  God gives instruction in this first section that the lamb was to be eaten.  If you read this chapter carefully you will find that when Moses epitomises Jehovah's instruction, he does not mention the eating of the lamb.  He gives instruction regarding the blood being put on the lintel and the two doorposts, but for some reason Moses makes no reference to eating the lamb roast with fire.  They were thankful to put the blood on the lintel and the two door-posts, but did they maintain the eating of .the lamb roast with fire?  When they came into the wilderness they murmured.  They lusted after the food they had in Egypt, and if it had been available to them they would have appropriated it; they did not really appreciate the manna.  Why was it?  It was because they did not maintain the eating of the lamb roast with fire.  Whether Moses knew there was no appetite for it, I do not know, but Moses did not mention it.  It says regarding this lamb "each according to the measure of his eating", Exod 12:4.  It is a question of appetite, whether we have appetite householdly for the eating of the lamb roast with fire, whether we contemplate, and are concerned to be in keeping with the sufferings of the Lord Jesus on our account.
The fact that they did not eat meant that their tastes were not changed.  Their tastes were still like the Egyptians' tastes.  Now, dear brethren, what is suitable in our houses and what goes on in our houses tests the householder especially.  I do not intend to say what is suitable and what is not suitable.  What I am concerned about is that our tastes should be right, that our tastes should change through the appropriation of the lamb roast with fire, of the sufferings of the Lord Jesus on our account, that we should be entirely delivered from the world and worldly things and come into the wilderness and be here for the will of God.  These persons were actually brought into the wilderness.  They could not, if they desired, get back to Egypt again, but in the wilderness they murmured because there was nothing to satisfy their worldly Egyptian tastes, whereas to have eaten of the lamb roast with fire would have altered their tastes, and they would have been content with God's provision in the wilderness.  The manna, the water that came from the smitten rock, all that God supplied to them in grace in the wilderness, would have been appreciated had their tastes changed.  But their taste did not change.
The house of everyone here, I am sure, has what answers to the blood on the lintel and the doorposts, but whether every household is engaged in eating of the passover lamb inside is another matter.  If we do we shall know what the wilderness is; this world will become a wilderness to us.  I think we can have the blood on the lintel and the door-posts, and goings-on in the household not be according to God.  We could not have goings-on not according to God if there were the eating of the lamb roast with fire inside.  This is a household exercise of eating, appropriating this kind of food, that our households may be maintained for the pleasure and glory of God.  It is a vital matter in our day in our houses, including young people.  The householder is responsible.  The householder was responsible here, a man for a house.  I am not saying what is suitable and what is not suitable.  What I am concerned about is that our tastes should be right.  What will deliver us from Egyptian tastes is this eating of the lamb roast with fire, the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ.  It is what underlies the Lord's supper.  The passover is what the believer is meant to feed on through the week so that he is ready for the Lord's supper.  I remember the time when, at the Lord's supper, we used to dwell on the Lord's atoning sufferings at length, until the Lord in ministry pointed out that that is the kind of contemplation we are meant to have through the week, so that we are ready to proceed with the Lord's supper when we come together.
When we come to our scripture in Leviticus we have what is suitable to be eaten in the sanctuary, therefore this would be what we would call an assembly matter.  The goat of the sin-offering, I suppose, refers to the previous chapter, the eighth day, where the goat of the sin-offering was offered for the people, see @Leviticus 9:15.  Regarding the sin-offering for the priest, the body was burned outside the camp and the blood was brought into the sanctuary, but with the goat of the sin-offering which was for the people the blood was not brought into the sanctuary.  Where the blood is brought into the sanctuary there is the whole answer, the blood of Jesus.  The Lord Jesus has answered fully the whole question of sin and departure and failure.  What a comfort that is!  Where the blood was brought into the sanctuary the body was burned outside the camp, wholly consumed.  It speaks of the One who sustained all the holy wrath and judgment of God, and perfectly answered to God's eternal satisfaction.  When we come to the anti-type, it is not only the blood carried in, it is the One who shed His blood who has gone in in all the fragrance of the incense.  The One who shed His blood has gone in and He there is the full answer to every departure on the part of His people down here.  But where the blood is not carried in, the sin-offering has to be eaten in the sanctuary.  The Lord, sustaining everything, is perfect, but He looks for an answer from us in our local settings.
Moses said in verse 18, "Lo, its blood was not brought in within the sanctuary:ye should certainly have eaten it in the sanctuary".  It is feeling with God, having God's feelings about things that happen.  Aaron and his sons were overwhelmed with their own personal loss and sorrow.  I am not minimising the personal sorrows that some of our dear brethren have.  The Lord knows all about the sorrows that our brethren carry, but Aaron was so overwhelmed by it that he was not able to eat the sin-offering; he could not rise to it.  Moses accepted what he said, but the Lord rightly looks for our feeling things as He feels them, not just our own personal sorrows and loss, but feeling matters as God feels them.  Moses said, "Ye should certainly have eaten it in the sanctuary, as I commanded".  Someone mentioned this afternoon that Aaron perhaps never appeared again in his garments of glory and ornament.  Perhaps this chapter provides the reason, for when we come to chapter 16 verse 1 reference is made to this chapter.  There was some deficiency, and although it was allowed for, nevertheless there was a lack.  I wonder if there is a lack in our local settings as to feeling things as God feels them.  How important it is that there should be an answer down here.  There is the answer up there all right.  There is the answer in the fact that the blessed One who shed His blood has gone in, and there is the answer to every question, everything that has come in in the way of failure and departure; but the Lord rightly looks for some answer down here in our local settings, that we are feeling things as God feels them.  May the Lord help us to eat this kind of food.  I am aware that I have endeavoured to present the eating of food which we may wish to avoid, but I am assured that it is important and available and not beyond us.
In closing I desire to refer to Jeremiah 15 in which we might take comfort from the fact that Jeremiah fluctuates somewhat like ourselves.  He is not all he ought to be.  He was God's servant and representative; he had served faithfully, but we find here that he says some good things and some things not so good.  How like him we are!  This chapter has to do with the fact that God is going to judge Judah and Jerusalem.  We were reminded some years ago in ministry as to the doom of Christendom.  Christendom is doomed; it is judged, awaiting the execution of the judgment.  God has a judgment of it and we are meant to have a judgment of it too, in line with what God feels.  Jehovah says here, "Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, my soul would not turn toward this people", Jer 15:1.  Moses and Samuel interceded for the people and God listened to them, but He says, 'Though Moses and Samuel were here, I would not listen to them'; the people had departed so far.  Jeremiah is found in these circumstances and he finds that he himself is cursed.  In verse 10 he finds himself the object of opposition, possibly wrongly so, but Jeremiah is feeling it as it affects himself, and he is getting down under it, just as we very often do.  Then he goes on to say in verse 15, "Jehovah, thou knowest: remember me, and visit me, and avenge me of my persecutors".  We ought not to say that kind of thing today.  That was not the Christian dispensation.  We are not to ask for vengeance on persecutors.  We are to bless those who curse us and love our enemies, see @Matthew 5:44.  What a test that is!  Some of us were reading that chapter last night.  We were attracted by the teaching of Jesus, but how testing it is when it comes to certain circumstances; "Love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who insult you and persecute you".
Jeremiah goes on in verse 16 to say, "Thy words were found, and I did eat them" -- possibly a reference to the book of the law found by Hilkijah the high priest in the days of Josiah, see 2 Chron 34:14.  He ate them.  "And the words were unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart; for I am called by thy name, O Jehovah, God of hosts".  This is a bright spot in the chapter.  It is just like our own experiences, up and down.  The weight and burden of things may get us under sometimes.  Then in Jeremiah 15:18 he says, "Why is my pain perpetual" -- he complains here -- "and my wound incurable?  It refuseth to be healed".  Then he says an extraordinary thing to God -- "Wilt thou be altogether unto me as a treacherous spring, as waters that fail?".  Do we get as far down as that?  Do we complain like that against God?  Then there is an answer in verse 19, "Therefore thus saith Jehovah -- If thou return...".  No matter how we have failed or departed, there is always the opportunity to return.  God invites us to return.  He invites persons who have left to return.  "If thou return, then will I bring thee again, thou shalt stand before me; and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth.  Let them return unto thee; but return not thou unto them".
These verses helped Mr Darby at the beginning of the revival.  These three statements were light to him and governed him during his life.  They are to govern us now, near the end of the time.  Returning unto them would be fraternising.  Be available to help anyone.  "Let them return unto thee; but return not thou unto them".  I referred to this chapter to show how Jeremiah is recovered by God's word, after fluctuating, after serving God and then getting down, not being what he ought to be; but God has in mind his recovery.  The Lord has consideration for us.  If we are not all we ought to be the Lord would speak to us and encourage us.  He will not give us up.  Let us be interested in the food available to us, and eat, in order to be here in life for the pleasure of God.
Grangemouth
17th January 1976
{121}
GOD SECURING OUR INTEREST
@John 4:10-15; @John 5:6-9; @John 8:10,11; @John 9:3
We were speaking this afternoon about the great need to become interested in the Lord Jesus personally and His things.  I want to show how God approaches men in the glad tidings in order to secure their interest.  Some may not see much interest in the glad tidings, but Satan does not have things all his own way for God is working and people are being converted, including young people.  Do you think teenagers are a hopeless lot?  Some are being converted.  We are thankful for that.  God is working and He presents His glad tidings in such a way as to secure the interest of people.
I want to show from these scriptures how the Lord Jesus, as presented in the glad tidings, would secure our interest.  God in the glad tidings is not putting obstacles in our way.  So far as God is concerned the sin question is no longer a problem.  The sin question is solved, and God is not giving men a long list of their sins to depress them.  That is what Satan would do.  Was it not Luther who dreamed that Satan presented him with a long list of his sins? Luther's answer was, "The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin", @1 John 1:7.  It is Satan who would depress you with the extent of your sins.  God would not, because He has the answer to every one of your sins, no matter how grievous, no matter how far you are from Him.  Is that not attractive in itself? God presents the glad tidings to men and in it is the answer to their sins.  He invites them to enjoy the forgiveness of sins on the basis of repentance and faith.
The Lord approached this woman as a blessed, real Man here, wearied with the way He had come.  He sat at the well of Sychar, and a woman, wearied with her history as a sinner, came to the well.  The Saviour, wearied with the way He had come, met one wearied with her own sinful history.  What a meeting that was! What did the Lord do? Did He say, 'You have been an awful sinner'? It may be some of us would not have been seen alone in the company of this woman, but Jesus approached her, not with a long list of her sins, but attracting her by the promise of living water.  She had come with her waterpot to Jacob's well.  I do not think that Jacob's well represents worldly amusements and pursuits.  She may have had plenty of experience of that kind of thing, but she came to Jacob's well for what was material, what was natural, what in a sense is right in itself.  It was the material water she was after, in order to fill her waterpot, to help her in her own natural life.  What she was going on with was another matter.  She came to Jacob's well to gain further strength and then intended to proceed on her own self-willed way.  But the Lord in a sense says to her, 'You know, my dear friend, I have something far better than that'.  The result was that she left her waterpot.  She got something so much better that she left it, she forgot about it.  I think she would come back for it later, but she was so full of appreciation of the Lord Jesus and the living water that she went to the men of the city and testified.  I suppose she would eventually return to her house needing ordinary water, but for the moment she forgot about it, because something greater had entered into her life.  That is how the Lord attracts her.  The Lord secured her interest, not by giving her a catalogue of her sins, but by speaking to her about living water.
The Lord Jesus is offering in the gospel the gift of the Holy Spirit.  Could you think of anything greater?  The living water speaks of the gift of the Holy Spirit which God is offering in the glad tidings.  He is looking for a basis in your soul by way of repentance and committal to the Lord Jesus as Saviour and Lord and Master, to impart to you the Holy Spirit.  Could anything be greater?  Think of this woman going her own self-willed way.  She is offered something far better.  She was affected not by her sins being imputed to her, but by being offered something so attractive.  Was she not interested?  Of course she was interested.  Would you not be? Would not some young person be interested that the Lord would present to you living water?  The Lord says here, "Every one who drinks of this water shall thirst again; but whosoever drinks of the water which I shall give him shall never thirst for ever".  Is it any wonder the woman was interested?  Is it not a matter for sorrow that persons are not more interested in what God offers in the glad tidings?  "Whosoever drinks of the water which I shall give him shall never thirst for ever".  You say, 'Is that possible?'  It is possible in the gift of the Holy Spirit, the living water.  The Lord says, "but the water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life".  What an offer He makes!
The Lord's first words to the woman were, "Give me to drink".  He suggests to her another way of living.  Instead of drawing refreshment herself in her own selfish outlook, she should think of the Saviour, and He proceeds to hold her attention and her interest.  How is it possible that guilty hell-deserving sinners should receive the gift of the Holy Spirit, and thus have within them a hidden, secret source of joy and power to make them independent of all that this world can offer? How is it possible?  The gift of the Spirit is possible because of the sufferings and death of the Lord Jesus Christ and because of His present position of exaltation.  The Lord Jesus undertook the work needed, the work of redemption, laid the righteous foundation whereby the sinner's sins may be forgiven.  The Lord Jesus undertook all this suffering, the transaction that no one else could undertake.  Every other man, woman, and child is a sinner and needs a Saviour.  There was only One who did not need a Saviour and that was the Saviour Himself.  He undertook the great transaction involved in His sufferings and death on the cross.
It involved His being abandoned by God.  It says in @2 Corinthians 5:19, "God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not reckoning to them their offences".  That was the life of Jesus here.  It is the attitude of God now -- "Not reckoning... offences".  God presents the glad tidings from the standpoint of reconciliation having been accomplished.  The work necessary for reconciliation has been undertaken by the Saviour and accomplished by Him.  That work is a completed work.  That scripture goes on to say, "Be reconciled to God.  Him who knew not sin" -- that is the Lord Jesus -- "he" -- that is God --  "has made sin for us".  Think of the awfulness of being made sin; the holy Sufferer, the holy, perfect spotless Victim, Jesus, "made sin for us, that we might become God's righteousness in him".
This work was necessary.  The Holy Spirit could not be given to men and women and young people apart from the righteous basis laid by the Saviour, our Lord Jesus Christ.  The work was undertaken by Him and thoroughly completed.  There is nothing left of that work to do, and God presents His glad tidings from that standpoint.  God is, speaking reverently, in the enjoyment of reconciliation accomplished.  What delight He has in the One who accomplished the work of reconciliation.  His precious blood was poured out, the witness of the price paid.  Oh what a price that was!  Who could estimate the value of the blood of Jesus, and His holy sufferings?  God alone knows fully the value of that finished work.  His shed blood is the basis, dear friend, for our forgiveness.  It is the righteous basis on which God is going to build His universe of bliss.  The foundation for the eternal order of things is the shed blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.  The world to come, peace and prosperity on this earth -- what is the righteous basis for it?  The shed blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.  And it is the basis, friend, for your forgiveness.
The work undertaken by the Saviour included that He was buried, put out of God's sight.  Did you ever think of Jesus buried? Burial is a kind of terminus; but He is not in the grave now.  The grave is empty.  At the end of Mark's gospel we read of a young man who was in that empty tomb.  When the women came to the tomb they found a young man there, see @Mark 16:5.  Think of a young man in the tomb.  You say, 'How depressing!'  Not at all.  The tomb was empty.  It was the evidence of victory.  Persons who went into that grave found everything in order, no evidence of a struggle.  The Victor, the mighty Victor, arose triumphant over death, and came out of the grave.  What a moment that was!  No one witnessed it but God.  No human eye saw what happened.  There is no record of the actual resurrection, it took place in secret, but there is plenty of witness to the fact that He is risen.  He was seen of many, even by above five hundred persons at one time, as a risen Man.  I used to think it was a very depressing thing for a young man to be in the tomb, but I do not think so now.  He was in the light of the tomb being empty, Jesus risen from the dead.  Dear friend, you can be in the light of the Saviour risen from the dead and highly exalted, given "a name, that which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow", Phil 2:9, 10.  It is from His position at the right hand of God that He is the great Administrator, and He gives the Holy Spirit to those who trust in Him and those who are committed to Him.
The Lord attracts this woman.  He gains her interest in such a wonderful gift, the Holy Spirit.  Then the woman says, "Sir, give me this water".  Do you wonder that she was interested?  I wonder that there are not more interested in the wonderful blessings that God offers in the glad tidings.  "Sir, give me this water, that I may not thirst nor come here to draw".  What did Jesus say?  "Go, call thy husband, and come here".  She was so interested, and so held by the Lord's approach to her in the glad tidings, that she was prepared to face the whole matter of her guilt and of her past.  She said later, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done".  That must have been a wonderful relief to this woman to think that all that guilty past was settled once and for all.  She would be able to say, 'It will never rise again during my lifetime here, and never rise in the hereafter'.  Is it any wonder that she became effective as an evangelist?  The men listened to her, men who no doubt knew her in the city.  She was so changed that she had moral power with these men and they came to Jesus and found for themselves that He was the Saviour of the world.
Now the man in chapter 5 was infirm.  He had lain thirty-eight years on a bed at the pool of Bethesda, a hopeless case.  What did the Lord say to him? "Wouldest thou become well?".  Did that not arouse the man's interest?  Of course it did, immediately.  The Lord did not say to him, 'There must be some reason why you have been here all that time; there must be something very wrong with you'.  He said, "Wouldest thou become well?" Oh how attractive! Dear friend, no matter what your need is, the Lord would say to you, 'Would you like Me to help you?  Would you like power to move according to the will of God?'  This man said, "Sir, I have not a man"; but there was a Man there, a Saviour ready to help him.  "Jesus says to him.  Arise, take up thy couch and walk.  And immediately the man became well, and took up his couch and walked".  Think of the relief, the benefit, this man received.
The woman in chapter 4 turned out well.  She maintained her interest.  She became a worshipper and she came into the testimony in a powerful way.  This man was interested enough in getting relief and immediate benefit, but it would seem that he did not maintain his interest in the Lord and His things.  That is like many today.  They have been sufficiently interested to get their need met and to be assured of forgiveness, and of their souls' eternal welfare, but the test is, are we maintained in interest here? Are we helping forward the Lord's interests?  This man, alas, did not.  He was linked with the Jews, he had more of a link with the Jews than he had with the Lord.  His interest ceased with his relief.  Now, dear friend, the Lord would have us maintain an interest like the woman.  The work was deep in her and she was maintained in interest as a worshipper and in the testimony.
Now this woman in chapter 8 was a guilty sinner, found in the act of sinning.  What would we have said?  We would have pointed out the seriousness of her conduct.  Of course, it was serious.  The Lord said to her, "Has no one condemned thee?  And she said, No one, sir".  Notice how these persons say 'Sir'.  They speak to the Lord respectfully.  What did the Lord say? "Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more".  This is the attitude of God.  Before the Lord said that, He stooped down and wrote on the ground, and then lifted Himself up and said, "Let him that is without sin among you first cast the stone at her".  Again stooping down He wrote on the ground, and lifted Himself up the second time.  Certainly one of these stoops must have involved His going into death and answering the whole sin question, especially the second stooping down, so that God can righteously take up the attitude of no condemnation.  What a word that was for this woman, "Neither do I condemn thee".  She no doubt was expecting to be condemned, and she deserved to be condemned, but because of the righteous basis the Saviour laid, He could say to her, "Neither do I condemn thee".
Was not this woman interested?  Was not this word the answer to her exercises?  The Lord said to her, "Neither do I condemn thee -- go, and sin no more", but we hear no more of this woman.  She was sufficiently interested and held in the presence of Jesus to get this word from Him; but the Lord said, as He said to the man in John 5, "Sin no more".  I wonder what happened to her.  Would she turn out like that woman in John 4?  Maybe she did.  It would all depend on whether she maintained her interest in the Lord Jesus and in His things, whether she received the Holy Spirit.  John the evangelist leaves the matter.  It would be a challenge to each one of us.  The question is, whether you are maintained in interest in the Saviour and in His things; whether you are committed to Him.  This woman is left, I think left for a reason, so that we each can question ourselves: How are we faring, how are we proceeding? Has there just been a spark of interest and it has flagged and ceased, or do we proceed in the way of the will of God and committal to the service of our Lord Jesus Christ?
In John 9 we have a man of whom the Lord says, "Neither has this man sinned nor his parents".  Now that does not mean that the man had not sinned.  It means that the Lord is looking on this person not in relation to the governmental consequences of sin, but He is looking on him in view of the works of God being manifested in him.  Would it attract you, that the Lord is looking upon you that you might manifest the works of God?  Would you rather manifest your own will?  You might say, 'I would rather manifest the works of men.  I would rather go to the university or be a big man down here'.  There is something infinitely better; to be here to manifest the works of God.  Would that attract you?  The Lord says, "Neither has this man sinned nor his parents, but that the works of God should be manifested in him".  This man is prepared to be a subject of the works of God, manifested in him.  He is prepared to be a subject of the Lord's own service, the Lord's own operations.  If you read the chapter you will see how the Lord approached him, and he was obedient and subject.  He was simply a subject of the Lord's own operations, and was subject to His word.  The word was, "Go, wash in the pool of Siloam... He went therefore and washed, and came seeing".
This man became representative of the Lord in His absence.  You will find in chapter 8 of this gospel that the Lord becomes the object of the opposition of men, and in John 9 from verse 6 the Lord is absent and this man is left to represent Him in testimony.  The Lord does not appear again until the end of the chapter.  All through this section the Lord is absent, and this man is left to manifest the works of God.  What a manifestation it was!  No one could shake him or make him give way.  He stood resolutely against these religious persons.  In fact he became an embarrassment to them.  In his own simple way, as manifesting the works of God, he became an embarrassment to these persons.  In chapter 8 the Lord was an embarrassment to them.  In chapter 9 this man who received his sight was an embarrassment to them.  They were glad to get rid of him.  The Lord was rejected in John 8 and this man is rejected in chapter 9.  He is manifesting the works of God; he is like his Master.  He is representing his Master during His absence, standing in testimony unmoved against all the opposition.
You will find that the neighbours come into it, the parents come into it, the Pharisees come into it.  All these try in vain to influence him.  He is manifesting the works of God.  What a privilege in this world, which has rejected our Lord and Saviour, to be manifesting the works of God, not manifesting what men can do!  There is plenty of that around, but it is all tinsel, empty, and all going to come down.  All that men are building up in their knowledge is going to come down.  The Lord said regarding the temple in Jerusalem, "there shall not be left stone upon stone which shall not be thrown down", @Luke 21:6.  Think of Western Europe and all that is going on in it, all the pretension, all the schemes and ideas that men have.  It is all going to come down under judgment.  But oh, to manifest the works of God, to stand firm representing our Lord in the testimony!  Can you think of anything greater, anything more privileged?  Would it attract you that you should know something of the works of God, and manifest the works of God?  That is what this man becomes.  He had not been long on the way; he was newly converted, yet he stands firm.  When he is questioned he says very simply, "A man called Jesus made mud and anointed mine eyes, and said to me, Go to Siloam and wash: and having gone and washed, I saw".  How simple it is! -- a simple transaction with the Saviour Himself, and this man is manifesting the works of God.
May the Lord help us to be interested, to be attracted.  One of the great teachers spoke about attraction and attachment and affection.  We might preface that by saying you become interested; then you become attracted, then you become attached, and then you have affection.  The woman in John 4 went the whole way, both in committal and devotion to the Saviour, and in the worship of God.  The man in John 9 went the whole way, reliable, trustworthy.  The man in John 5 we are not sure about.  The woman in chapter 8 we are not sure about.  I would like to be reliable; would you not?  The Lord would take you up in view of being trustworthy here in the testimony and the service of God.  May it be so, for His Name's sake!
Grangemouth
18th January 1976
{129}
"THE GRACE OF LIFE"
@1 Peter 1:1-8; @1 Peter 1:14,15; @1 Peter 1:22,23; @1 Peter 3:7
I am thinking, dear brethren, of what is secret and what becomes manifest.  There are certain family secrets that believers are meant to have; they belong to the Christian family.  They have their bearing upon us as believers and there is an outshining as a result.  I think we get this idea in these opening chapters of Peter's first epistle.  There is not much in the way of real testimony unless there is something secret in the souls of believers.  Family secrets, which believers have laid hold of and understood, result in the way of testimony.
I read verse 7 of chapter 3 because there is an expression there that is unique -- "the grace of life".  I think that as what believers have as family secrets lays hold of us there is some expression of "the grace of life" in relationships down here with other persons, with unbelievers, with authorities, and with fellow-believers, and in other relationships of life.  Whether it be servants and masters, wives and husbands, or children and parents, there is something meant to shine out which Peter describes as "the grace of life".  It is a lovely expression.  You do not see much of it around us, in fact there is nothing of "the grace of life" in this world unless it be in believers who have some family secret that is appreciated and understood.
In this epistle Peter addresses "sojourners of the dispersion".  I suppose they were Jews who had been dispersed, scattered about.  They were not much thought of; they were not highly respected; they were poor sojourners.  Over this wide area of "Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia", these five Roman provinces, these Jewish believers were scattered and under reproach, far from their national home.  The Israelis speak today about their national home, and what pride they have in it!  What fighters they are for their national home!  But these persons were dispersed, yet they had family secrets.  We would not have thought, if we had seen them, that these Jewish believers had much in the way of family wealth or secrets, but Peter goes on to say, "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father".
'Elect' -- oh what a family secret to have!  Election is a family secret.  Elect is applied to the Lord Jesus Himself.  "Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect", God says, "in whom my soul delighteth!", @Isaiah 42:1.  God's elect is the Lord Jesus Christ.  He is God's elected, selected Man!  How we love to think of Him!  He is spoken of as the elect in @1 Peter 2:6, "Behold, I lay in Zion a corner stone, elect, precious".  How precious is that blessed One who is the elect, God's elect.  But it is an expression that applies also to believers.  This is one of the great family secrets, that we are elected.  We do not preach this; we do not tell unbelievers, 'We are of the elect'.  It is a family secret that governs us, that lays hold of us, and certain things result from knowing and appreciating that we belong to God's elect.  What could be greater?
Let each one of us here lay hold of that family secret, "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ".  Both "the obedience" and the "sprinkling of the blood" are of Jesus Christ, but it is "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father".  We often praise the Father as the One to whom belongs the glory of purpose.  How wonderful!  "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" who has "chosen us in him before the world's foundation", @Ephesians 1:3, 4.  But then it is "by sanctification of the Spirit".  That means that while it is "according to the foreknowledge of God the Father", some work has taken place "by sanctification of the Spirit" -- set apart by the Spirit -- and this would account for the possibility of "the grace of life" being manifest.  There is something, therefore, substantial in the believer's soul history "by sanctification of the Spirit".
What is in view?  "Unto the obedience … of Jesus Christ".  Think of "the grace of life" that shone in Jesus here in perfection, in His obedience in perfect manhood.  We are elect unto that; that is in view.  When God elected us it was with that in view, "Unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ".  I have no doubt that the latter refers to the claim of that blood.  Of old the blood was sprinkled on the people of Israel (Heb 9:19), that is, the blood claimed them.  In Christianity the blood of Jesus Christ would claim each one of us.  The priest at his consecration had the blood put upon his right ear, the thumb of his right hand, and the great toe of his right foot (@Leviticus 8:23); and when the leper was cleansed he also had the blood put upon his right ear, and the thumb of his right hand, and the great toe of his right foot (@Leviticus 14:14).
It speaks of the claim of that blood.  Of course, the blood provides for expiation and the forgiveness of our sins, and for God's satisfaction regarding our whole past history, but it makes certain claims upon us -- "unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ".  It is secret soul history that results in "the grace of life" being manifested in this scene of moral death.  In this world of men in their ambition, self-will, and independence of God, believers are manifesting "the grace of life"; that kind of grace that shone in Jesus here in perfection is continued in believers, the same kind of life, the grace of it, the attractiveness of it, and the beauty of it.  Even if unbelievers do not take account of it, it is down here for the pleasure of God.  The idea of being heirs is linked with "the grace of life"; we become heirs of it -- the grace and beauty which shone out perfectly in Jesus are to be continued for the pleasure of God and in testimony to men.
Peter goes on to say, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to his great mercy, has begotten us again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from among the dead, to an incorruptible and undefiled and unfading inheritance".  This is another family secret.  It is a family secret that we are elect, as has been said.  That is outside of ourselves; it is not because of any goodness in us, it is because God is sovereign in His purpose and sovereign according to His great mercy; but the believer is also to be in the secret of the fact that he has a wonderful inheritance "reserved in the heavens".  Peter views the inheritance as future, which in actuality it is but he would have their hope active as to it.  It lifts the hope of the believer as to what we are about to enter into in actuality.  Now these are secrets that result in the manifestation of "the grace of life".
Then Peter goes on to speak about their sufferings.  Their faith was being tried and tested.  Faith is much more precious than "gold which perishes".  Gold is not "unfailing", but the inheritance is "unfading", and Peter says, "the proving of your faith, much more precious than of gold which perishes, though it be proved by fire".  These persons were not only despised but they were being persecuted.  They were going through suffering, but the secret in their souls was "Jesus Christ -- whom, having not seen, ye love".  The secret link in the soul, in faith, is with the Lord Jesus personally.  How important is this secret side of our lives.  There is the appreciation of election, and the appreciation of the inheritance we are just about to enter into, meantime there is a little bit of suffering here, and sacrifice and faithfulness are called for, but we are to be attached to "Jesus Christ: whom having not seen, ye love; on whom though not now looking, but believing, ye exult with joy unspeakable and filled with the glory".
These are wonderful expressions that Peter uses to encourage these scattered sojourners, these despised sufferers in these Roman provinces, to lift them up, to strengthen their faith and to give them hope, so that they should not just get through with difficulty, but be overcomers, and "the grace of life" be manifested for God's pleasure.  Maybe men would not take account of it, but "the grace of life" is there, something is expressed that is appreciated and beautiful for the divine pleasure down here.  It is, in principle, like the new man.
When the Lord said to Saul of Tarsus, "Why dost thou persecute me?", (@Acts 9:4) it certainly involved the truth of the body, but I think it also involved the truth of the new man, that is, the features that were seen in Jesus continued in believers down here, so different from men in the world.  It is another kind of man, another order of man altogether, and after his conversion Saul would appreciate the features that he had seen in these believers whom he was the means of persecuting.  He hated these persons because of these features, but he would eventually appreciate that these were the features of the new man, that these persons had divine secrets and were prepared to suffer because of the light of those secrets in their souls.
"Whom, having not seen, ye love" -- Peter, as we are often reminded, could not say that, because he had seen the Lord personally in manhood here and had seen Him, too, in resurrection.  But these persons had never seen Him, and we have never seen the Lord Jesus.  Dear fellow-believer, we are going to see Him!  It has been said that we shall never see the Father, but we shall see the Lord Jesus, we shall see a blessed Man and the Father will be seen in Him.  We shall actually fix our eyes on the Lord Jesus.  We have not yet seen Him, yet we love Him.  What a Person He is who holds the affections of believers!  Therefore these persons in their sufferings and persecutions were held and sustained because of the secret they had in their souls.
We could read all the chapters because they are so full, but we can only touch on certain features, and so Peter addresses them as "children of obedience".  What a fine expression!  They belong to the family of obedience.  What a family!  There is something delightful about an obedient family naturally, although most children break out sometimes, but "children of obedience" means taking after the features of Christ, "unto the obedience... of Jesus Christ".  Of course, His obedience was Unique.  There was never one obedient as He.
If we are obedient, and if we are "children of obedience", it is because we have learned to have our own wills subdued and to submit to the will of another.  But the obedience of Jesus was that He never exercised His own will -- He never had any desire apart from God's will.  That, was the perfection of the obedience of Jesus Christ.  But here are persons who are "children of obedience"; they belong to the obedient family.  I wonder if we are all "children of obedience", whether we are all subject to the Lord Jesus Christ, subject to the will of God.  If we are, it is because we have learned to be subdued, and learned to submerge our own will and to submit to the will of Another.  So Peter goes on to speak about their being "not conformed to your former lusts in your ignorance".
So these beautiful expressions go on here.  It says in verse 21, "who by him do believe on God, who has raised him from among the dead and given him glory, that your faith and hope should be in God".  That was a secret in the souls of these persons; their faith and hope were in God.  All these features we are mentioning underlie the expression of "the grace of life".  So it speaks about "Having purified your souls by obedience to the truth to unfeigned brotherly love, love one another out of a pure heart fervently; being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the living and abiding word of God".  We have another origin altogether.  And so these chapters go on to speak about "a living stone" (@1 Peter 2:4), Christ the living stone, and believers coming to Him as living stones and being built together.  All these things are secret.  We come as individuals, but there is what is collective.  There are secrets we have collectively.  We have links together which are secret.  Links with the Lord Jesus are secret, appreciation of the Father's election is secret, but we have also secret links together, links in the Spirit, affection for one another.  All these are divine secrets, known and experienced.
Then what is to be manifested is "the grace of life".  Peter says (@1 Peter 2:13) -- "Be in subjection therefore to every human institution for the Lord's sake; whether to the king as supreme, or to rulers as sent by him".  Then, "servants, be subject with all fear to your masters", v 18.  I think the filling out of these relationships, dear brethren, is in the expression of "the grace of life", resulting from what is secret in the believer's soul.  If we lack in the secret side we will lack in the side of expression; there will be less expression, maybe no expression, of "the grace of life", but instead we may be rebellious or insubject.  As the elements of obedience, subjection, and submissiveness are expressed "the grace of life" is seen down here.  I think the very expression "the grace of life" ought to become attractive to us and we ought to be concerned to have our part in the expression of it in the midst of such corruption, violence, and evil as that in which we find ourselves.
So the relationship of servants and masters is mentioned here.  As we think of the condition of things around us we can hardly speak of the relation of masters and servants; it hardly exists.  There are employers, of course, and employees, but we know the conditions in industry today.  Think of persons being subject to their masters, this spirit, this "grace of life" shining out, over against such a dark background as that in which we live.  I believe the age we live in is the most selfish age there ever was.  It is every man for himself.  We have never known such an increase in the asserting by persons of the rights they think they have.  One of the features of our day is nationalism, for instance, the rights of nations.  It did not exist in the same way before the last war, but since then there has been a rising of nationalism.  People speak of the so-called rights of nations and personal rights, all that kind of thing, and over against it all there are simple persons here, not much thought of in the world, manifesting "the grace of life".  In 1 Peter 3:7, we have the relationship of husbands and wives introduced; "the grace of life" is to shine out in all our relationships.  Sometimes they are testing, sometimes very testing, and yet there is to be "the grace of life".
At the end of 1 Peter 2, after speaking of servants and masters, the writer goes on to speak about the Lord Jesus as a Model, "For to this have ye been called; for Christ also has suffered for you, leaving you a model that ye should follow in his steps -- who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who, when reviled, reviled not again".  It is "the grace of life", dear brethren, seen perfectly in the Lord Jesus who "when suffering, threatened not; but gave himself over into the hands of him who judges righteously".  It is "the grace of life" displayed in perfection in a blessed Man down here, which is to be continued in believers who are in the understanding of divine and family secrets and manifest the same grace, the same features.  It would be in measure, because there was perfection in Christ.  "Who did no sin" would, of course, be unique in Him, but my concern is that the understanding of that of which we are in the secret should result in this same "grace of life" being displayed.
So 1 Peter 3 contemplates a wife in difficult circumstances, but there is exhortation as to adorning.  Adorning is to be secret and inward, not outward.  "Whose adorning let it not be that outward one of … putting on apparel".  "The grace of life" is not putting on anything, clothes, or airs and graces, human niceness, or anything of that kind.  There is no such putting on with the believer who is in the secret of these family and divine matters.  It is what they are shining out and "the grace of life" is thus manifested.  Peter speaks of "the hidden man of the heart", @1 Peter 3:4.  That is the secret side.  This section contemplates a wife with a husband who is unbelieving and difficult.  Now can "the grace of life" work out there?  She is governed by "the hidden man of the heart".  The husband would be the seen man of the heart, the public man of the heart, but she has the "hidden man of the heart", that is, Christ.  That is, in principle, Christ dwelling in her heart by faith, and what is to result is "the grace of life" in very difficult and trying circumstances, "the hidden man of the heart, in the incorruptible ornament of a meek and quiet spirit"; that is, "the grace of life".
Well, may the Lord encourage us to be attracted to be in the enjoyment, in the appreciation, of a secret order of things -- election, an inheritance "reserved in the heavens", "children of obedience", knowing that we have another source of life and power as "born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the living and abiding word of God".  We have desires and motives that are different from those of the natural man, different from what we are by nature, derived from God.  These secrets, dear brethren, need to be understood and appreciated by us, and, without putting anything on, "the grace of life" is manifested and relationships are filled out in this beautiful way for the divine pleasure.  The same grace that shone in Jesus is to shine out now in believers here.  The early part of chapter 3 envisages very difficult circumstances where "the grace of life" is to shine.  The 'conversation', the manner of life, "the grace of life", is to be such that persons are won.  There is a powerful testimony that overcomes and secures.  That possibility is put here, and whether it is this relationship spoken of here, or other relationships, there is something powerful operating.
Then "fellow-heirs of the grace of life" means that there are persons bound in the very close relationship of husband and wife, the closest of all relationships, and they are "fellow-heirs".  This is what is normal.  Not now one an heir, and another not an heir, but 'fellow-heirs'.  It is heirs together of "the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered".  I think we ought to value and appreciate what is normal and promote what is normal.  This divinely instituted relationship becomes the additional occasion for "the grace of life" to shine out.  Let us not be without what is secret; let us not be without "the hidden man of the heart"; nor be without reality, with no 'putting on'.  May there be this "incorruptible ornament of a meek and quiet spirit".  I wonder which one of us has a "meek and quiet spirit".  It is a feature that marked the Lord and it is a feature in which "the grace of life" is manifested.  May the Lord encourage us therefore to understand and to appreciate divine secrets, and to have part in this testimony of "the grace of life", for His Name's sake.
Malvern
11th June 1977
{137}
SALT AND LIGHT
@Matthew 5:13-16
Two features that properly belong to believers during the time of the Lord's absence are the salt of the earth and the light of the world.  Salt arrests decay, corruption, and the working of leaven.  This scripture might read, Ye are the salt of the land; that is, it is salt operating in a certain area.  When the Lord was here there was a wonderful influence operating.  We were reading on Lord's day in Mark 14 about the Lord in the testing circumstances before the leaders of the Jewish nation in the high priest's palace.  He stands out in His perfection, His uniqueness and the holiness of His humanity.  The Lord here is a wonderful object of contemplation, but in His absence believers are to be 'the salt of the land'.  Wherever believers are, whether it is in their homes or in their business, in their employment, at school, whatever area believers are in, there is to be a restraining influence, a pure influence that arrests the working of corruption or leaven.  Where the believer is true and where his reality shines, whatever the area may be, there is an arresting of what is evil.  The Lord says "but if the salt have become insipid", that is, if the salt loses its own character; the believer is meant to have a certain character.  Peter says "in your faith have also virtue", 2 Pet  1:5.  Virtue is the working of reality; it is the courage to be what you are.  There are features in that section which Peter exhorts us about, so that the believer should appear in his true character as linked with and true and faithful to the Lord Jesus in heaven and having the Spirit possessing him down here.
We were reading on Lord's day about Peter "sitting with the officers and warming himself in the light of the fire", @Mark 14:54.  For the moment the salt had become insipid.  Peter had lost his true character.  He said earlier "Lord, if it be thou, command me to come to thee upon the waters", @Matthew 14:28.  You see in this confession the reality of Peter.  He was a real believer.  You see his reality again shining out when he said "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God", @Matthew 16:16.  Think of the character that Peter really had!  But when he was warming himself at the fire beside the officers he was not shining in his true character; he became mixed up with those who were really the enemies of the Lord.  The salt had become insipid.  For the moment its true character was not shining.  How liable we are to be mixed up!  We need to maintain separation from evil, if the salt is to retain its true character; there has to be the feature of separation.  If there is mixture there will be insipidity and the salt will lose its true character.  "Ye are the salt of the earth".  Just as the Lord was when He was here, so believers ought to be in His absence, and the Lord gives us His Spirit to maintain reality and to prove our reality, and to act as genuine disciples of the Lord.  Peter was a genuine disciple of the Lord but he was not acting as a disciple in the verses referred to in Mark 14.  We have all been like Peter; maybe some of us still are.  Peter was recovered; he went out and wept bitterly.  When Peter spoke of dying with the Lord (see @Mark 14:31) he meant it; he really loved the Lord.  He was recovered as we can see in the early chapters of the Acts where we can see the feature of "the salt of the earth".  Think of the influence Peter had!  We read of Peter's shadow; Peter's shadow appeared to be the means of healing persons, see @Acts 5:15.  Think of the greatness of the influence that Peter had!  Think of him taking that lame man by the right hand!  He said "Silver and gold I have not; but what I have, this give I to thee: In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean rise up and walk", @Acts 3:6.  You see the salt operating in Peter as a recovered man.
If we become insipid in any sense at all, there is a means of recovery.  What has happened in Christendom is that the salt has become insipid permanently.  In the ruin of the church, including the setting up of the clergy and all the human arrangements of men, the salt has lost its true character; it has become insipid.  It says, "if the salt have become insipid, wherewith shall it be salted?  It is no longer fit for anything but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot by men".  That is what has happened in mere profession, the mere profession of Christ and of Christianity, and it is all around us.  What we have around us is not heathendom, it is not heathen darkness; it is the insipidity of salt that has lost its savour.  If salt is exposed for any length of time to certain elements it will lose its true character.  Let us understand that we are meant to be an influence for good, an influence to arrest the working of evil and the working of leaven wherever we are found.  This is what the believer is meant to be; it is how he has part in the testimony, not only in what is said but in what he is in reality, shining out over against a corrupted Christendom among which we move.
Then the Lord says "Ye are the light of the world".  When the Lord was here He said "I am the light of the world", John 8:12.  The influence that arrests the working of evil in this world is the influence of believers; and the only light in this world is with believers.  When the Lord takes believers out of this world, as will happen at the rapture, there will be nothing left but darkness.  Oh, what darkness there will be!  It says at the opening of the sixth seal, "the sun became black as hair sackcloth" (Rev 6:12); that is what is going to happen.  The only light there is in this world now is in believers.  When the Lord was here the only light in the world was what shone in Christ; otherwise there was darkness.  "In him was life, and the life was the light of men.  And light appears in darkness, and the darkness apprehended it not", John 1:4, 5.  The Lord said to his disciples, "Ye are the light of the world".  This world is in total darkness except for light that shines in believers.  This is light, of course, as to God, as to the true knowledge of God and as to the grace of God.  Where are these features found?  They are found only in believers.  Nowhere else in this world is there light according to this verse.  "Ye are the light of the world: a city situated on the top of a mountain cannot be hid".  So it is geographically, a city on top of a mountain cannot be hid; it is seen.  The Lord says "Let your light thus shine before men"; I take it that refers to verse 14 as well as verse 15.  Let your light thus shine, as if we were on top of a mountain, not hidden somewhere, not covered up by self-gratification, not covered up by business, not covered up by any other thing, but shining, the light thus available for men.  "Let your light thus shine before men, so that they may see your upright works, and glorify your Father who is in the heavens".  Oh think of the obligation that is upon us as believers, especially, dear brethren, as believers who have light vouchsafed to us, not because of our faithfulness but because of the faithfulness, the reality and the committal of men and women who have gone before us.  Think of the reality that was seen in the recovery of the truth!  How real persons were then!  How real the coming of the Lord was to these persons!  Thus because of their faithfulness, because of their committal, certain light has come to us: light as to the kingdom of God; light as to the assembly of God; light as to "my assembly", as the Lord spoke of in Matthew chapter sixteen.  Think of what wonderful light we have!  The Lord might say to us here in this city, "Ye are the light of the world".  Every believer would shine in some way, but believers who have been blessed with such truth as has come to us are meant to shine in testimony like a city situated on the top of a mountain.
The Lord says, too, "Nor do men light a lamp and put it under the bushel, but upon the lamp-stand, and it shines for all who are in the house".  There is the position of a city set on a mountain top; that is a great public thing.  Our light is to shine publicly.  "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", John 13:35.  All men are to know.  There is what is public, but there is what is inside the house:  "Nor do men light a lamp and put it under the bushel, but upon the lamp-stand".  That is where the lamp is meant to be; it is meant to be upon the lamp-stand.  It corresponds to local assembly conditions; brothers and sisters in their true place, and satisfied with the place they have, in the working out of things locally.  It is not to be put under the bushel.  We are always tested as to what we put first.  We might tend to regard the Lord's things and the meetings as part-time affairs.  We may have a pursuit in life and fit in the meetings somehow or fit in the Lord's service somehow.  That is not the idea at all.  The Lord said "seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you", @Matthew 6:33.  Everything else will fit into its proper place if we put first things first.  Dear Mr Edgar Maynard often told us what he got from Mr Taylor: learn to put first  things first.  The lamp is not to be put under the bushel.  It is important, of course, that we should earn our livelihood and be righteous.  But the lamp-stand is the lamp's proper place.  The lamp is to be put upon the lamp-stand and it shines for all who are in the house.  The city on the mountain shines for all men, for all to see, but the lamp on the lamp-stand shines for those who are in the house.  Those in the house get the benefit of the lamp on the lamp-stand in its proper place.  May the Lord help us.  These are obligations on us.  Whether we like them or not, dear brethren, they are obligations upon us, but the Lord would help us to fulfil them.  He would give us the power in His Spirit to fill out these obligations that He puts upon us.  You will notice that it is emphatic 'ye':  "Ye are the salt of the earth"; "Ye are the light of the world".  The obligation is put on them and the Lord means it to be put on us, but He will help us to fill it out in reality and power.  May it be so.
Edinburgh
12th July 1977
{141}
FIRST THINGS
@Matthew 6:31-33; @Luke 12:1-3; @1 Timothy 2:1-6; @James 3:17,18
We are all governed by what we put first.  If a man is engrossed in his business when he ought to be with his family he is a business man, he puts business first.  If a man puts his family first he is a family man; he might even be with his family when he should be at business.  If a man puts sport first he is a man of sport.  Many put themselves first; if I put myself first I am a selfish man.  We are governed by what we put first; therefore what we put first is of all importance.  In the first scripture we have read the Lord says to his disciples "But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness": seek ye first.  The Lord had spoken about other things, about food and raiment; these things have their place, but what matters is what comes first.  The Lord says "Do not be careful" (v 25), do not put first what shall we eat or what shall we drink or what shall we put on.  Maybe men tend to think of what they eat, and women tend to think of what they put on, but these things are not to come first; "seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness".  What does that mean?  There is an area down here which can be called the kingdom of God; it is in the hearts and souls of believers who confess Jesus as Lord, who have received the Holy Spirit, who have their own links maintained with the Father.  The kingdom brings persons into right relationship with the Lord, with the Holy Spirit, with the Father and with one another because believers are meant to be brethren in the kingdom of God.  "Seek ye first the kingdom of God"; that is, seek first the promotion of what is for the pleasure of God down here, seek first to extend the prosperity of the interests of the Lord Jesus Christ down here.  Then the Lord says "and all these things shall be added unto you".  Everything else will fall into its proper place as we seek first the kingdom of God.
When two of John's disciples followed Jesus we read "But Jesus having turned, and seeing them following", John 1:38.  These two disciples might not have known that anybody was seeing what they were doing, but the Lord saw.  If anyone here sets himself or herself to seek first the kingdom of God the Lord will take account of you.  If you are set in your measure for the prosperity of the interests of the Lord Jesus Christ down here the Lord will have regard to you and the Holy Spirit will help you.  "But Jesus having turned, and seeing them following, says to them, What seek ye?"  What a question that is!  If every one were asked this evening, what are you really seeking?  what is your objective in life?, what would be your answer?  These disciples said "Teacher, where abidest thou?".  They were beginning to be interested in the Lord Jesus and His interests.  I trust there is someone here who, if up till now has never thought of the promotion of the Lord's interests, might begin to put it first.  The Lord will encourage you, the Spirit will support you in this move which you desire to make because it is as we move in a right direction that we get the Spirit's help.  Moses turned aside to see the bush that was burning and was not being consumed, and Jehovah saw that he turned aside to see (see Exod 3:2, 3).  I would say this for the encouragement of anyone who desires from this day forward to put the Lord's interests first.  All the other things, the necessities of life, have their place, but they will all fall into their right place if we put first things first: "seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness".  I trust we will all be set that our first consideration in anything we do or any matter that confronts us is, how would this affect the Lord?  Would this be pleasing to the Lord?  Would this promote the interests of our absent Lord Jesus Christ who is coming soon and looks for persons down here faithfully to promote His interests in His absence.  In this gospel of Matthew you will find five definite identifiable courses of instruction, but we will not be able for any of the other courses unless we begin in the first course -- "seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness".
At the end of the 11th chapter of Luke, we read "And as he said these things to them, the scribes and the Pharisees began to press him urgently, to make him speak of many things", v 53.  The scribes and Pharisees made the Lord speak of many things because they had an ulterior motive, they were opposers of the Lord; it says they were watching Him to catch something out of His mouth that they might accuse Him.  It is in the context of the scribes and Pharisees making Him speak of many things that in chapter 12 "he began to say to his disciples first".  He had many things to say to the scribes and Pharisees in chapter 11, and they caused Him to say many things, but the Lord has something first in mind to say: "he began to say to his disciples first".  The note indicates that it was the first thing on His heart to tell them.  It would be a great matter, dear brethren, to enquire as to what would be first in the Lord's heart to say to us.  We might say many things, many right things and many true things, but O to be a true disciple to desire to have what the Lord has first in His heart to say!  The crowd were gathered together and were treading one on another, disregarding one another, imposing themselves on one another; then "he began to say to his disciples first, Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy".  I understand the word 'hypocrisy' comes from the idea of acting a part.  We live in a day when much acting goes on and the best actors are acclaimed, but that is not to mark the disciple; we are not to be acting a part, and yet we are always in danger of professing to be what we are not.  What is needed, dear brethren, is reality with every one of us.  If we are real we will use diligence to gain the knowledge of God, to hear what the Lord has first in His heart to say to us.  We are always in danger of the leaven of the Pharisees.  Let us hate this very idea of being unreal or professing to be what we are not and acting a part.  The Lord would have us entirely delivered from this hypocritical attitude.  Paul said, in writing to the Corinthians, "But by God's grace I am what I am", @1 Corinthians 15:10.  Let us be, dear brethren, what we are; there is nothing more attractive than for a believer to be what he is by God's grace.  Someone said, if I imitate somebody else, who will be me?  Let us each have our own spiritual personality.  What a personality Paul was!  In Acts 20 those he spoke to embraced him.
Now in 1 Timothy we have Paul writing to an individual, having in mind the truth of the house of God.  God's house is where God is known and where He is represented.  Paul is concerned that Timothy should take on this feature of representing God and that he should take on a charge to promote the representation of God in the lives of believers with whom he came in contact.  So he says "I exhort therefore, first of all"; there were many other things he would exhort him about but this was the first thing he had in mind.  He says in effect, if you are going to represent God down here you will have to have an outlook like God has.  "I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men".  We need, dear brethren, universal outlook.  Paul exhorts here that our outlook should be as wide as God's outlook is, because he goes on to say "for this is good and acceptable before our Saviour God, who desires that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth".  We tend to be narrow; we are never, dear brethren, to be narrow-minded and we are never to be narrow in our hearts.  Our feet are to be in the narrow path as Mr Darby wrote often in his letters, but our outlook is to be as wide as God's outlook is in the glad tidings which Paul speaks of here.  Not only does God desire that all men should be saved but Paul goes on to speak of God's provision for all men: "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all".  Supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings, are priestly activities, but they have in view all men, not only all who live in Britain.  We often hear prayers for the government of this country, but we are to think of all men and other governments too.  How extensive is God's outlook and God's desires!  How great is the provision that God has made for all men!  Let us be no longer narrow in our outlook or in our hearts, although keeping our feet on the narrow path.  We need wisdom to keep our feet on the narrow path, in the path of God's will, God's will for every believer, and yet have in mind all men.  Then it says "for kings and all that are in dignity, that we may lead a quiet and tranquil life in all piety and gravity; for this is good and acceptable before our Saviour God".  God is represented in persons who have an outlook like His own.  Paul wrote to the Colossians that his object was to present every man perfect in Christ, see chap 1:28.  It has been said that he would look upon every man as a potential for Christ.  When he was in Corinth he was told to stay there for the Lord had much people in that city.  They had not yet come to light, but when Paul was in Corinth he would look upon every man he came in contact with as a potential for Christ, a potential for the will of God.
James speaks in his epistle about wisdom.  There is a great need of wisdom in this day in which we live.  It may be that there is more wisdom needed in the day in which we are than was needed in the early days of Pentecost or in the days of the pristine securing of the gentiles by Paul.  Both Paul and James condemn all human wisdom and merely human intellect.  James presents the wisdom which is from above and which he says "first is pure".  I believe, dear brethren, if there is one thing needed it is purity, purity of motive and purity of desire; we so tend to be influenced by prejudice or preference that we depart from purity.  If we are going to derive the wisdom which comes from above there must be this feature of purity.  The word of God searches our motives; it will penetrate and divide and discern thoughts and intents of the heart, see Heb 4:12.  We need the word to penetrate so that if our motives are impure, the impurities are exposed and judged and we are found with purity of motive.  It is not an easy matter to act always on pure motive, we so tend to be wrongly influenced, things influence us, persons influence us, preferences influence us, prejudices influence us; even Peter had deep prejudice.  Apostle as he was, commissioned, given the keys of the kingdom -- for he was the one whom the Lord meant to use to open the door of the glad tidings to the nations -- he had to have a vision three times, the great vessel like a sheet coming down, to overcome the innate prejudice that he had.  In the epistle to the Galatians, in the second chapter, when Peter came to Antioch, he was not quite clear of that prejudice.  How deeply it was in Peter and how deeply it is with us!  These kind of things corrupt purity of motive, "But the wisdom from above first is pure".  If we can arrive at purity of motive we can go on to the other features -- "peaceful, gentle, yielding"; the Authorised Version reads "easy to be entreated".  O what wisdom that is!  If you are on the wrong course would you like to be easy to be entreated?  O that this feature were found in every locality on the face of the earth!  Alas I am afraid it is not evident in every locality.  There must be some fault as to the "pure".  If we can be pure we will be easy to be entreated.  The brethren will not entreat in vain; there will be an answer to a right entreaty, yielding and unquestioning, that is uncontentious.  These are very practical matters dear brethren.  What I want to call attention to is "first is pure"; then these other beautiful features, which were no doubt seen perfectly in the Lord Jesus will be manifested with each one of us.
So may the Lord help us to know what it is to put first things first, because what comes first in our lives will govern us.  May the Lord come first, may His interests come first.  It may be we could put the Lord first in a certain way but not get what is first in His mind.  There are many real believers who are devoted to the Lord but whether all their activities come from what is first in His mind is a question.  We need to have the Lord before us as an objective, but we also need to get the Lord's mind as to how we are to apply ourselves.  May we be helped to put first things first for His Name's sake.
Lochgelly
10th September 1977
{146}
GOD SEEKING
@Luke 19:9,10; @Luke 15:8-10; @John 4:23,25
I just have an impression to speak to you this afternoon about God seeking.  It is a wonderful thing, in fact it is an extraordinary thing, that God should be seeking.  It is an unusual attitude on the part of the blessed God to be seeking persons.  God who is all wise, all powerful, who sees and hears and knows everything, is seeking persons; that is remarkable.  None of us would be blessed unless God was active in this attitude of seeking.  We have read of the Son of man who has come to seek and save that which is lost.  Think of man being lost!  This is ridiculed by unbelieving scientific men around us in the world.  Many educated men and women regard the description of the garden of Eden and man placed there and man's disobedience as a kind of fable.  God placed man in the garden in order to get pleasure from him.  Man was created for God's pleasure.  There is a word in Revelation 4: "and for thy will they were, and they have been created" (v 11); that was God's purpose in creating men, but also, man has been lost because of the activities of Satan; the serpent in the garden instilled into the woman doubt as to God.  The woman gave her ear to the serpent and Adam disobeyed; the serpent, cunningly, craftily got at man through the woman but both were involved in the fall.  He suggested that God was not all Eve thought He was.  The serpent succeeded in bringing a distance between man and God.  It is an awful thing that God lost the confidence of man.  No being has more right to man's confidence than God, but the serpent so intervened that man departed from confidence in God.  That is where the distance came in, where the darkness came in, darkness and doubts as to God; such thoughts are in every human breast.
The gospel tells us that God is seeking the recovery of men and women and boys and girls.  God is seeking the recovery of that which is lost, and in order to recover what was lost the Son of man has come.  Various reasons are given in Scripture why the Lord came and why He went into death, and one of them is that "the Son of man has come to seek and to save that which is lost".  When Adam sinned, when the fall took place, God felt the loss far more than Adam did.  It was God who said "where art thou?", Gen 3:10.  Adam never thought of saying regarding God, where art Thou?  In fact, Adam and his wife were hiding themselves from God in the trees of the garden.  You see thus the distance, the doubt as to God, the lack of confidence that the serpent was successful in instilling into the hearts of Adam and his wife.  It was God who said "where art thou?"; it was God who felt the loss and it is God who is active in the recovery of that which was lost.  By nature we are all lost, and if we have been found it is because of the activities of the Son of man, because He has come into manhood being in His Person God Himself.  This morning those of us who broke bread worshipped the Lord Jesus because He is God.  "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God", John 1:1.  The Word became flesh but it never altered the fact that He is God.  How wonderful to think of the greatness of the Saviour, the Son of man, the Lord Jesus Christ!  He was pleased to become a Man to seek and to save that which was lost.  It meant, dear friends, that men were at a distance from God, and if we are at a distance from God, that distance had to be gone into by the Saviour Himself.  If you could measure what it cost the Lord Jesus to be abandoned by God you would get some idea of the moral distance that there was between our souls and God.  O how awful the darkness!  How hopeless man's position!  No one could recover himself and no one could recover his brother.  There was only One who could effect the basis of the recovery of men and that was the Son of man.  We read of His suffering at the hands of men, but there was also His suffering at the hand of God, becoming the sin bearer that the distance might not only be bridged but removed.  God is presenting glad tidings from the standpoint of reconciliation having been accomplished.  When the Son of man was here amongst men the distance was in a sense removed because He came near to men; in manhood the Lord Jesus came near.  He was available to everyone who had need; He was available for healing, for giving power, forgiving sins, for every human need.  How remarkable that the Lord should come so near to men!  But then He has sustained the abandonment, He has suffered the penalty of death, He has poured out His precious blood, He has been buried, that a righteous basis might be laid that men might be recovered.  No one could be recovered apart from that tremendous work undertaken and completed by the Lord Jesus Christ.  Every person needs a Saviour, every one who ever lived needs a Saviour.  There is only One who did not need a Saviour and that was the Saviour Himself.  There is only one Saviour; no matter what men say, there is only one Saviour; salvation is in none other.  The Lord Jesus Christ raised from the dead by the glory of the Father and highly exalted is available as a Saviour.  We might think it would have been simple to have been alive on the earth when the Lord was here and be able to touch Him as some persons did.  The Lord Jesus personally touched certain persons and others touched Him.  You might say how simple it would have been!  But, dear friends, the Lord is more available where He is now as a Saviour than He was when He was here.  The Lord moved in a very small area when He was here, geographically He covered very little ground, sixty miles I suppose from Galilee to Jerusalem, and if we were alive in this country we should have had to travel to Palestine; but you need not make any journey, you can contact the Lord where you are in this room, in your own room or wherever you may be at any time.  The Lord is more available as Saviour in His present position than He was when He was here; He is available for all men.  It calls for the exercise of faith; it is a matter of simply believing, simply trusting.  We often speak about the Ephesians as being a remarkable company that lived in the time of the pristine glory of the assembly; how did they begin?  You will find it in verse 13 of @Ephesians 1:13 "the Christ; in whom ye also have trusted".  They trusted the Saviour; that is how they began.  O what a simple beginning!  Paul was able to announce to them the whole counsel of God; they were ready to receive the fulness of the light of Christianity; but how did they begin?  They trusted the Saviour.  Just where you are, dear friend, you can lift up your heart and trust the Saviour.  Maybe you are burdened with your sins; if you are you can lift up your heart to the Saviour where He is.  In fact in the preaching of the glad tidings the Saviour comes near to you.  In the Spirit's power the Saviour presents Himself to you.  If you are as yet an unbeliever and have not trusted Him the preaching of the glad tidings is a difficult position for you to be in; you have to thrust Him away because the preacher presents the Saviour to you as available to you now at this moment where you are.  If you are burdened with the sense of your guilt and your need of a Saviour, lift up your heart now and trust Him.  You can tell the one who sits next to you, I trust in Jesus as my Saviour.  It is the basis on which your sins are forgiven.  The Lord Jesus is the One who has the administration of the divine bounty, of all the blessings that God has in mind in the glad tidings beginning with the forgiveness of sins.  The Son of man has made possible the way in which we who are lost can be recovered, found.  There is no other way.
Then there is the Lord seeking now.  The Lord said to Zacchaeus "To-day salvation is come to this house, inasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham; for the Son of man has come to seek and to save that which is lost".  The seeking is of that which was lost of the house of Abraham.  While in one sense God is seeking in a universal way all men, there is a sense in which God is seeking certain persons, for the setting here of that which is lost is Zacchaeus and his house.  In the glad tidings God is specific and particular and personal.  While the glad tidings are available to all men, God speaks to individuals; He is speaking to you personally.  The Lord is seeking Zacchaeus and his household.  It is a good thing to take account of our households in that way; maybe some of our households are not all we would like them to be; let us think of the Lord seeking with a view to salvation.  Reference was made this afternoon to the jailor: the word to him was "Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house", @Acts 16:31.  If we realise that the Lord is seeking certain persons, then maybe we will be on that line of seeking too.  The Lord is very gracious and very patient in His seeking; He is of course very faithful too.  Joseph was sent out by his father to seek the welfare of his brethren, and someone asked him what his purpose was and he said "I am seeking my brethren", Gen 37:15.  Joseph acts with remarkable skill; he knows when to be firm and when to show grace.  Joseph spoke roughly to them; that is, he was faithful with them, but he gave them their money back in their sacks; that was grace.  What affected them more than the hard speaking was the fact that they received their money back; that upset them.  We need to learn skill; sometimes we are hard when we should be gracious and sometimes we are gracious when we should be firm.  Joseph was skilled; eventually he secured his brethren.  It says "he kissed all his brethren" Gen 45:15.  What a fine conclusion!  It is worthwhile setting ourselves to be with the Lord in His seeking and seek wisdom from Him to be faithful and yet to be gracious and secure the end He has in view.
Now in Luke 15 we have the woman seeking.  She is suggestive of the Holy Spirit's activities.  There is one drachma, one piece of silver, lost which was of great value to the woman.  Maybe others would not think of it as of much value but this woman set her heart on the securing of this lost one.  This lost drachma would no doubt suggest one who is a believer but not in circulation, not in function.  If a piece of silver is yours and it is lost you may as well not have it, it is of no value until it is found.  There may be many believers today who are not available for what the Spirit has in hand.  It says "if she lose one drachma does not light a lamp".  Light is needed; this coin is in darkness, maybe covered up with dust under some piece of furniture; the woman brings in light.  Believers can be used by the Spirit to enlighten other believers.  What a service we can render to fellow believers not available for what the Spirit has in mind, perhaps sitting at home!  She lights a lamp and sweeps the house; she disturbs things, maybe sets some dust moving; the drachma may be covered up with dust; she sweeps the house and seeks carefully till she finds it.  I have no doubt that the Holy Spirit is active at the moment in this kind of service, and He would look for some of us too to be more available to secure what God Himself values so much.  It is a very homely kind of parable:  it is a woman and her house.  It is a house she would know well; she would know every bit of furniture and every corner of the house, just as the Spirit knows all about us, and if we are not available as we ought to be He is seeking.  He would bring light through the glad tidings, and He would disturb our consciences so that we might be discovered.  Then, see the rejoicing that comes in: "and having found it she calls together the friends and neighbours".  It is a fine thing to be found.  If the owner has lost something of great value, O think of the joy he has when he finds it!  Have we all been found?  As believers we could be lost as far as the present activity of the Spirit is concerned because the Spirit would bring us into the current and the power of what is for the pleasure of God at this present time.  It says "Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma which I had lost.  Thus, I say unto you, there is joy before the angels of God for one repenting sinner".  The sweeping of the house and the seeking must affect the conscience because it brings about repentance as to the lost condition and of being out of circulation, and now there is recovery, a lost one is found.  I trust we are all found; I trust we are all in the current operations of the Holy Spirit.  There is blessing for the believer in being found and there is joy before the angels of God, joy in the presence of God when one is actually found.
Now John 4 shows that all is in view of the satisfaction of the Father.  The glad tidings are meant to bring us into right relation with the Lord Jesus, into the possession and power of the Holy Spirit, and into right relations with the Father.  This is the seeking of divine Persons not only for the blessing of the believer which is great and vast, but for the satisfaction of the heart of God Himself, the Father seeking such as His worshippers.  Here was an unlikely person, as has often been said, this woman by the well of Sychar, a disreputable character possibly.  It has been said that she came to the well when the other women would not come because she felt the reproach of her sinful history.  She came there seeking water from the well, but there was the Lord Jesus seeking her in view of the satisfaction of the Father.  What a privilege we have, dear friends, to be here for the satisfaction of the blessed Father Himself!  That will be eternal.  We are to be secured now as one of the true worshippers, and this will go into eternity.  It says here "the hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; for also the Father seeks such as his worshippers".  This is not formal worship; this is worship in spirit and in truth.  "In truth" would be in the great light of Christianity, of revelation, of God's purpose and of God's thoughts.  "In spirit" would be reality with us, not formality; not merely nominal but in spirit and truth.  May the Lord help us to be persons who are not only sought but found, secured and fully recovered, for the glory and pleasure of God.
Lochgelly
11th September 1977
{152}
ELECT
@1 Peter 3:17; @1 Peter 4:1,2
Peter writes to sojourners dispersed in certain Roman provinces far from their homeland.  He refers to them in chapter 2 as "strangers and sojourners", @1 Peter 2:11.  I suppose they would have no rights in the countries in which they were living; they were strangers below and citizens above.  They would have no influence on the course of this world; they were in the world but not of it.  They were not of the world but in it to testify, and for the pleasure and the will of God.  That is our position as believers -- we are in the world but we are not meant to belong to it, we are meant to be apart from it.  Our citizenship is in heaven, and yet we are left here in the world for the pleasure of God and for testimony.
Although they are addressed as sojourners and strangers they are addressed also as "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father", @1 Peter 1:2.  Although they would not be much thought of in the provinces in which they were, nor be persons of influence or be honoured by their fellow men, they were elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father.  God the Father had these very persons in purpose before the world's foundation, which is true of believers down here now.  This dignity, dear brethren, belongs to persons who are believers in our Lord Jesus Christ.  The Lord Jesus Himself is the Elect; "Mine elect".  God said as to Him (Isa 42:1); it is special to Him; He is unique as God's Elect; yet these persons were elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father.
Peter adds, "by sanctification of the Spirit".  Not only were they in God's mind before the world's foundation but they were persons who had received the Holy Spirit in view of being sanctified, set apart for holy purposes.  That is our place down here, "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by sanctification of the Spirit".  The elect come to light as set apart by sanctification of the Spirit.  I understand that the word "elect" applies to the words that follow -- "according to" and "by" and "unto"; "unto the obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ".  The end in view is that persons are to be obedient.  Indeed the same persons are addressed in 1 Peter 1:14 as "children of obedience"; they belong to that family.  "Unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ", that is, the blood of Jesus Christ has certain claims upon these persons and they are desirous of answering to the claims that the blood has upon them.
In Leviticus 8 the blood of the ram of consecration was put on the tip of the right ear, on the thumb of the right hand, and on the great toe of the right foot of the priests, and the oil was put on these same members.  I think we need to represent a fulness of committal and devotion in the day in which we live.  There was never a time for half measures, nor for having one foot self-pleasing and one foot in the will of God.  It is impossible really; it is an unsatisfactory state to be in.  What the Lord is after is fulness of committal to Him and to the will of God.  The cleansed leper also had the blood put upon the tip of the right ear, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot, @Leviticus 14:14.  We are all, I trust, cleansed lepers; we have known what it is to do our own will, even as believers, but there is a way of repentance and cleansing.  The same treatment as in the consecration of the priests was given in the cleansing of the leper.  It is in view of being set apart "by sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ".
In 1 Peter 3:18 Peter says, "Christ indeed has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God".  It is a great matter to be brought to God, to be brought from our own matters, our own things, our own interests, and brought to God, brought in view of being serviceable to God and committed to His will.  I had especially in mind the opening verses of chapter 4.  It says there, "Christ, then, having suffered for us in the flesh, do ye also arm yourselves with the same mind; for he that has suffered in the flesh has done with sin".  The question, dear brethren, is whether we are prepared to suffer rather than sin.  It is a test for every one of us.  What will help us is our positive link with a living Man in heaven who, as it says at the end of chapter 3, "is at the right hand of God, gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being subjected to him".  The Lord Jesus Christ holds the highest office in the universe; no one surpasses Him as to the office which He fills, angels and authorities and powers being subjected to Him.  How blessed to have Him before us as the object of our faith and our affections, and to be held, to abide in Him in that sense.
Then as we consider the fact that He suffered for sins we are by the Spirit's help brought round to preferring to suffer rather than sin, to prefer to do God's will rather than do our own.  What a practical matter it is, to prefer to please God rather than to please ourselves, to prefer to be deprived of certain things that would please us.  Not only is it wrong to sin, but the Spirit would help us to prefer to suffer rather than sin.  Our tastes are to come round to this view that we would prefer to suffer rather than sin; we prefer God's will to our will; we prefer to be pleasing to God rather than please ourselves; we prefer to be deprived, to deprive ourselves of certain things that please us, in order to be here for the pleasure of God.  This is how the elect, dear brethren, come to light.  A few of the elect in New York are here; such persons are dignified.  They are certainly not all here tonight; there are many elect in New York; but the great challenge is whether we are showing that we are elect, whether there is with us this "sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ".  It comes out in these features I have mentioned that we prefer certain things, prefer God's will to our own will.  None of us is like that naturally, not one of us; it goes against nature; but may the Lord help every one of us to desire to have this kind of taste, this kind of desire, to please God rather than please ourselves.  May the Lord help us.
New York
14th March 1978
"BUT THOU..."
@Matthew 6:6; @2 Timothy 3:10; @2 Timothy 3:14,15; @2 Timothy 4:5,6; @Jude 20,21
We are living in a time when we are all being tested as to what kind of persons we are individually, as to our relations with God, with the truth, and with one another.  In a sense everything depends upon what we are as individuals.  If there is to be what is collective locally for the Lord's pleasure and the service of God everything depends on what kind of persons we are in the locality.  We have to realise that we are living in a time of Laodicean conditions when there is generally indifference to the rights of Christ and departure from the truth.  It reminds us of the book of Judges when everyone did what was right in his own eyes (Judg 17:6); that is the kind of condition that is all around us.
The emphatic "thou" or "ye" comes into these scriptures we have read.  In the first the Lord is condemning hypocrites.  Hypocrites are persons who act a part, and we are all in danger of acting a part.  The test is as to reality, whether we just act a part, whether we just put on appearances, or whether we are real in secret.  This verse in Matthew 6 speaks about what we are secretly; not what we are publicly.  We may pass muster publicly, but the test is what we are secretly, what we are in the presence of God.  If we are right secretly we shall be right publicly, but the danger is of attempting to keep up appearances publicly and not being really basically right in secret.  The Lord says the hypocrites love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets so that they should appear to men.  "But thou", He says, "when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret".  It would be a challenge as to what are our secret links with God.  You cannot make up in other ways for the lack of secret links with God; nothing replaces it; it is of inestimable value.
The most valuable possession any believer has is his knowledge of God.  How do we know God?  Secretly, by our secret relations with God.  The Lord takes account of the pharisaical, hypocritical attitude and He is concerned about His disciples; "But thou", He says; they were to learn to know God secretly.  What are we in secret?  I would take home to myself, and I trust every one here would take home to himself and to herself, the challenge as to what we are secretly with God.  Are we growing in the knowledge of God secretly?  It is intensely individual, "Thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret".  It is the believer and his Father.  It is something direct between the soul of the believer and his Father, "and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret, and thy Father who sees in secret will render it to thee".  It is a question, dear brethren, of what we are secretly.  This secret link with God, secret intercourse and communion with God, puts something into the soul of the believer that men do not understand, and even Satan himself has not the ability or the capacity to appreciate.  Satan does not know what is there; it is something beyond his reach.  That does not mean to say that we will not be within his reach in temptation and that kind of thing, but something is built into the soul which is mysterious.
You see it in a man like Job; Jehovah said to Satan, "Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him on the earth...?", @Job 1:8.  Satan in effect said to Jehovah that He had been very good to Job.  But Jehovah knew there was something in the soul of Job that Satan did not know about and had not the ability to appreciate.  Satan knows the actings of the flesh, he understands lust, envy, and all these things, because he was the source from which these things came, but he does not understand what is built up in the soul of the believer by secret communion with God.  What results in the soul of the believer is something that is mysterious; it is built up in this secret link with God resulting in the knowledge of God.  May the Lord encourage every one of us to see to what we are in secret with God -- "thou", "thy chamber", "thy door", "thy Father who is in secret".
I suppose we all know that 2 Timothy was written in view of the time of public breakdown and public confusion, with all kinds of conditions to be met by believers.  Immediately preceding the verse we read in chapter 3 Paul writes about Jannes and Jambres withstanding Moses; they were men who could imitate.  They had to retire before the presence of life but they could imitate up to a certain point and we are surrounded by the element of imitation.  Paul says to Timothy, "But thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching".  On the one hand we need to maintain our secret links with God, but along with that we need each one of us to be genuinely interested in the truth.  There is a need for interest in the teaching, for persons to be really instructed.  That does not come if we are not committed, if we are not devoted, and if we are not intensely interested to be taught, to become intelligent.
Believers are meant not only to be affectionate towards the Lord Jesus -- it is true that the Lord Jesus looks for affection -- but He also would help us to be intelligent.  There are many believers who have genuine affection for the Lord Jesus Christ -- and thank God for every one of them -- but how many are intelligent?  How many know where they are and why they are there?  How many are concerned about knowing this?  We need, dear brethren, to commit ourselves with genuine interest, as Timothy had done.  Paul says to him, "But thou hast been thoroughly acquainted".  Timothy did not arrive at thorough acquaintance without intense interest and without devotion.  If there is one thing needed at the present time it is an increase in devotion.  Perhaps many believers who do not have the opportunities we have are more devoted, "But thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching"; the note says, 'hast followed up'.  Oh there is a need to follow up!  There is a great need of teaching, on the other hand there is much valuable teaching available if only we are devoted to go in for it and take it in.
How important this is, for young people especially, to be thoroughly acquainted with Paul's teaching.  You find it in the Scriptures.  The Scriptures are the great divine standard, the great test for everything.  You will find the unfolding of Paul's teaching in accredited ministry.  Are we all thoroughly acquainted?  Maybe we are not all thoroughly acquainted, but I wonder if you are interested, I wonder if you are concerned to be thoroughly acquainted with "my teaching, conduct...".  Teaching involves the truth, the understanding of the truth, and the truth is to govern conduct.  Truth is not only to be held mentally but it is meant to govern our conduct.  "My teaching, conduct", he says, "purpose".  Think of Paul's purpose.  He had a purpose in life, he surely had.  Would we have the same purpose?  Timothy was thoroughly acquainted with Paul's purpose and was to continue the same purpose.  We are all well aware I am sure that there is always a tendency for deterioration.  How important for young people to have purpose in life; may we all be more purposeful with the great purpose that Paul had, the purpose that beloved Mr Darby had, and others that followed him who were specially helped of the Lord; they had purpose and they maintained that purpose.  The Holy Spirit would help us to be maintained in this purpose, that there may not be another drop.
There has been a certain purpose that has marked those who have gone before us; is it being maintained in the present generation?  Is it being handed on to the following generation?  That is one of the tests that confront us in this day.  Paul says, "thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with" (or 'hast followed up') "my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, longsuffering, love, endurance, persecutions, sufferings".  What a list this is, and Timothy had fully followed these things.  When things seemed to break down and Paul's teaching was departed from, Timothy seemed to lose heart, but Paul gives him a mild rebuke.  He says, "For God has not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power, and of love, and of wise discretion", 2 Tim 1:7.  Things may seem difficult and fragmentary compared with what we used to know, but Timothy is to be encouraged that God has not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power, and of love, and of wise discretion.  "Be not therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord": the testimony of our Lord is going through; the question is whether I am committed to it, whether I am sufficiently interested and sufficiently devoted to maintain this purpose in life.
Later in the chapter Paul says, "But thou, abide in those things which thou hast learned".  We are living in a time when many are giving up things.  How sad it is!  Many who seemed to appreciate the truth are giving things up.  "But thou", Paul says, "abide in those things which thou hast learned, and of which thou hast been fully persuaded, knowing of whom thou hast learned them".  O, dear brethren, there is a need to abide in these things, to hold fast these things, no matter who gives them up.  Maybe some friend gives up, or somebody we know well gives up, "but thou" -- it is a question of each person maintaining, being set to maintain -- "abide in those things which thou hast learned, and of which thou hast been fully persuaded".
Much was committed to Timothy which he was to entrust to faithful men, 2 Tim 2:2.  There was a charge laid on Timothy, but there was the wherewithal in the Spirit of God to maintain the charge that was committed to him, 2 Tim 1:11.  It would seem that Timothy did accept the charge and fulfilled it.  "Abide in those things which thou hast learned", that was one of the charges committed to him.  The question is whether we accept the charge and are concerned to fulfil the charge that is committed to us, for something has been handed down to us from those who have gone before.  What an unfolding of the truth there has been, dear brethren; the question is whether we appreciate it, whether we are concerned to abide in those things we have learned.
Then Paul says to him in 2 Timothy 4, "But thou, be sober in all things"; the note says, 'This implies, not watching actively, nor being awake, but that sober clearness of mind resulting from exemption from false influences -- not muddled with the influence of what intoxicates.  So we think of one when we say, He has a sober judgment'.  There is a need for being sober for there is a certain solemnity about the day in which we are when there is public confusion and many departing.  All is meant to have a sobering effect upon us.  "Be sober in all things... do the work of an evangelist, fill up the full measure of thy ministry".  There was something committed to Timothy and he was to fill up the full measure.  Paul says, "For I am already being poured out"; he had filled up the full measure of his ministry and now he is being poured out.  One has to be filled up before he is poured out.  The whole life of Paul, a life of devoted service, had been filled up and he was being poured out.  Timothy had some time before him and he was to fill up the full measure of his ministry, the full measure of what was committed to him.
Now there is something committed to each one of us; it is measured; what is committed to each one is measured and the Lord would encourage us, and the Spirit would help us, to fill up the full measure of the service that is committed to us.  Everyone is meant to have something to do, some part in this great work of the testimony that is going on to completion.  Each one has a measure; "fill up the full measure of thy ministry".  We were speaking recently about Romans 12:3, "God, has dealt to each a measure of faith", and that measure of faith operates in the one body in Christ.  The word 'proportion' comes into that chapter, everything is proportioned; one has not got everything, but each one has something and it is proportioned with a view to the operating of the one body in Christ.  And in @Ephesians 4:7; "to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ".  Therefore each one has something in the way of measure.  The great question is whether we are prepared to fill up the fulness of the measure that is given to us.  This again calls for devotion and committal, not being indifferent, callous or careless.  May the Lord help each one of us individually to take on these matters that are emphasised by the expression "but thou" occurring in these scriptures.
Now in the book of Jude we find not "thou" but "ye".  It is "but ye", that is a company of persons down here.  "But ye, beloved, building yourselves up on your most holy faith".  This would work out locally.  I think it must come through this moral way, it must come through our secret communion with God, our growing in the knowledge of God.  It must come through committal to the truth, and through our conduct and our purpose; it must come through the way we have indicated, and persons like that are together in localities.  The exhortation is, "But ye, beloved, building yourselves up on your most holy faith".  We are meant to be builders up of one another, edifiers of one another.  The individual we have spoken of according to Matthew 6 and 2 Timothy 3 and 4 will be building himself up, but then each takes responsibility in the locality and there is a mutuality about building ourselves up.
This is a great test and challenge for us as to how we get on locally, how we build ourselves up locally, how we edify one another.  We have not chosen one another; maybe we would not have chosen one another; but we were put together not on the basis of our selection but on the basis of divine selection.  We may have different temperaments, old and young, different upbringings, we are different in many ways, but we are put together to be builders up of one another, "building yourselves up on your most holy faith".  We find tests and difficulties, and many things may come in, but we need to consider for one another, value one another, appreciate one another, love one another, and so answer to "building yourselves up".  It is the practical working out of the edifying of the body of Christ which Paul speaks about in Ephesians, "connected by every joint of supply, according to the working in its measure of each one part, works for itself the increase of the body to its self-building up in love", @Ephesians 4:16.  It would result in that kind of activity as we build ourselves up on our most holy faith.  Then "praying in the Holy Spirit"; what a resource we have in the Holy Spirit!  This building up would not take place without dependence on the Holy Spirit and on help from the Lord.
You know, dear brethren, what Satan is most against is believers working together in local companies.  Satan's activities are applied specially towards those who represent what is collective for the heart of Christ and the pleasure of God.  He will use to his own purpose many little things which come in, but let us be all set, as persons who have come this moral way, to be the builders up of one another.  There is a great need for mutual brotherly confidence.  I think there is in fact much evidence of mutual brotherly love and confidence at the present time.  Let us be concerned that this may continue and increase and deepen as we build ourselves up on our most holy faith.  "Praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God" -- what an area to keep ourselves in -- "awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life".
I trust we may be encouraged.  I have not spoken as I have to depress anyone; there is no need for any one to be depressed.  But there may be a need for each one of us, the speaker included, to answer the challenge and be more definite and more devoted in these relationships I have spoken of, resulting in local conditions of confidence and love and edification, being built up in our most holy faith.  May it be so for His Name's sake.
Brooklyn NY
18th March 1978
{162}
PROPORTION
@Exodus 30:34-37; @Romans 12:4,5
The idea of proportion comes into these two scriptures.  God is a God of order.  He is not a God of disorder (@1 Corinthians 14:33), and He is the God of measure, @2 Corinthians 10:13.  We might say He is a God who delights in proportion.  The God of measure measures everything.  All God's dealings are measured, even with each one of us individually.  There are certain difficulties, burdens and sorrows we have to bear but they are all measured; no one is called upon to suffer without the God of measure entering into it, and there is no suffering laid upon the believer without there being abundance of grace to meet it.  There is never a measure of sorrow or burden beyond the grace that God is pleased to supply to meet that sorrow, whatever it may be.  It is fine to think of, and to know, the God of measure.  Everything is measured and everything is proportioned.
This first scripture speaks about the incense: "in like proportions shall it be".  It says "according to the proportions of it" in verse 37.  What precedes the incense is the anointing oil.  The anointing oil is also in certain proportions.  The anointing oil comes down, it is upon persons who are anointed, but the incense arises.  In a sense the incense is the answer to God from the anointing.  Both the anointing oil and the incense speak of the Spirit, especially as the Spirit of Christ.  No matter what is laid upon any one of us there is sufficient in the anointing to help us through in dignity and power.  Then the answer is the incense.  The anointing oil was put upon the whole tabernacle, but then the incense is what arises, a kind of answer, a response to what comes down.  The Spirit came down at Pentecost, and the Spirit is available, as the Spirit of Christ, for every one of us for whatever is laid upon us.  The Spirit of Christ is available to us for support and help, and for power and dignity, for God's glory.
But the incense is what is found here for God's pleasure in what ascends.  It is the grace of Christ expressed.  It was seen perfectly in the Lord Jesus when He was here.  Think of the proportion of the graces seen in our Lord Jesus Christ.  The dependent Man, the subject One, the obedient One, and yet the faithful One.  In every situation faithful, and yet along with it, dependent, humble.  Beautiful graces shone in the Lord Jesus here in perfect proportion.  It has been said that there was not one outstanding feature in the manhood of our Lord Jesus Christ.  That same spirit is to be taken on by us, so that there is proportion, things are proportioned.  As helped in the Lord's dealings with us, in instruction and in discipleship, by being attached to our Lord Jesus Christ and helped by the Spirit, we are meant to take on these gracious features which are seen perfectly in Him.  God is pleased to use discipline too.  He passes us through discipline, through sorrows and difficulties, but the end in view is that there should be some feature of the incense.  It suggests prayer, how we pray.  It is all for the pleasure of God.  There is this idea of proportion in it, dear brethren, which I would be concerned about myself.  There may be outstanding features with us, but then the proportion suggests an evenness that is to be arrived at by the Lord's gracious dealings with us, including His discipline.  We learn much by instruction, but we learn much by discipline, by things which we have to go through, things we would rather not go through, things we would rather not have to face.  Yet the Lord uses these that there might be proportion in our moral being which is so pleasing to God Himself.
Now in Romans 12 we again have this idea of proportion.  The human body is proportioned.  There is no member outstanding in the human body; it is perfectly proportioned.  Each belongs to the other, each belongs to the whole.  The idea of proportion makes one whole.  Paul writes here about one body having many members, but all the members have not the same office.  That is, there is variety but it is all proportioned.  In the human body there are a great variety of members, more than I could enumerate.  You think of the different systems that operate in the human body -- the respiratory system, the nervous system, the blood system.  How much operates and each system helps the other, it is all proportioned; and so it is in the one body in Christ.  This is meant to work out locally.  There is meant to be proportion, making for unity and making for one complete whole, and every member is needed.  Any member is missed if it is not functioning.  Every member is needed in the local setting, and it speaks in verse 3 about each one having a measure of faith, "as God has dealt to each a measure of faith".  That is the God of measure, proportioning what is needed in the body.  It comes down to the locality.  God proportions what is needed in the locality.  Every one is needed, but then no one dominates; the whole thing works smoothly -- that is, the idea of the body is meant to be expressed locally.  In @1 Corinthians 12 Paul speaks about the body.  He speaks about the one body, which would be a universal idea involving every believer who has the Spirit of Christ, but then he comes down to "Ye are Christ's body", v 27.  The assembly at Corinth was meant to express the features that were seen in the body universally.  The body features work locally.
So it goes on to say here, "We, being many, are one body in Christ, and each one members one of the other".  Members of the body of Christ and members one of the other.  Each one is necessary.  Each one belongs to the other.  It is not only the working of love, it is something organic.  It is a question of belonging to one another.  The human body is, I suppose, one of the most wonderful organisms that there is; but then the body of Christ is a more wonderful organism because it is not physical; it is spiritual, it is animated by the Spirit of Christ -- a wonderful organism!  We are members one of the other.  "But having different gifts, according to the grace that has been given to us, whether it be prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith".  Each one has a measure of faith, and each one has a proportion of faith, and as we function in that proportion it makes for unity and oneness, a smoothness, all for the pleasure of God and for the edifying of one another.  May the Lord help us to be attracted by this idea of proportion, to find out what our proportion is, and to fit in in that proportion for the glory and pleasure of God.
Plainfield NJ
21st March 1978
{165}
HOW BELIEVERS PROVE THE LORD AS PRIEST
@Hebrews 2:16-18; @Hebrews 3:1; @Hebrews 3:7; @Hebrews 3:25
The Epistle to the Hebrews is a very important one.  Of course all the epistles are important, but there is something special about the Epistle to the Hebrews.  As far as I can remember it is the only scripture in the New Testament which presents the Lord Jesus as Priest.  This epistle was written to Hebrew Christians, and no doubt Paul wrote it, and he wrote it in language which they would understand.  In John 6 Peter came to it that Jesus was the holy One of God, and that would involve His priesthood, but I do not think the Lord is definitely called Priest in any other New Testament scripture.  That, of itself, would make the epistle very important because the priesthood of Christ is a truth that we all need to understand and appreciate.
Now in these two scriptures I have read we get reference to the kind of persons who get the full benefit of the Lord's priesthood.  The Lord Jesus as Priest would have every believer on His heart.  The high priest in the Old Testament wore the breastplate which contained the names of each of the tribes of Israel, and even if the tribe was not what it ought to be, its name was still there.  The Lord Jesus is available as Priest to every believer, but we read where He "does not indeed take hold of angels by the hand, but he takes hold of the seed of Abraham".  Now "the seed of Abraham" would suggest the moral features that characterised Abraham, therefore the Lord taking hold of the seed of Abraham means that the Lord Jesus supports as Priest persons who are characteristically obedient and believing and are here for the will of God.  Even if believers are not devoted to the will of God the Lord Jesus has regard for them and is available for them, but it is persons who are committed to the will of God who get the full support of the Priest.  It may be that the Lord as Priest is not known as He ought to be.  I believe that when brothers and sisters get older and maybe weak in body, maybe suffering, such persons experience the Lord as Priest.  Even if they do not realise that it is as Priest that they are looking to Him, in experience they draw support and are strengthened and are able to overcome frailty, and in spirit they are able to rise above weakness.  That is the believer drawing from the Priest; it is the Lord's priestly grace and support that enable believers to rise above infirmity or suffering, or whatever it may be.
Now such are of the seed of Abraham.  Abraham did not take an easier path.  There might be, as we have had in our meetings, a tendency with us to take an easier path, to look for an easier way, a way that would involve less exercise, less sacrifice, but that was not the way Abraham took.  Abraham took the path of obedience and believing God.  It says in this very epistle, "By faith Abraham, being called, obeyed to go out into the place which he was to receive for an inheritance, and went out, not knowing where he was going", Heb 11:8.  He stepped out in faith, but he was supported and sustained and helped.  Melchisedec met him and brought forth bread and wine to support him and sustain him in this way of the will of God.  He went out, not knowing where he was going.  All Abraham knew was the God who called him; and he trusted Him and took the step in faith, not seeing the end of the way.  Abraham was the first to be called and, remarkable man that he was, he went out not knowing where he was going.  We have a whole chapter, the eleventh of Hebrews, to show those who were in this way before us.  Our Lord Jesus Himself is presented in chapter twelve as the Leader and Completer of faith.  He sets out the whole course.  This book speaks about the race, the course; the Lord Jesus is our Forerunner and we are after-runners in the same course as He fulfilled, and I need not say it was no easy path.  It was a path of suffering and reproach and sorrow.  He was a Man of sorrows and acquainted with grief and, as this passage indicates, He went through these experiences that He might, speaking reverently, qualify to enter sympathetically into the feelings that believers have as they follow their Forerunner; as we had on Lord's day,
We follow our Forerunner to His God
(Hymn 284).
We are not stepping out into the dark, because the Lord Jesus has gone before us, besides all these persons who are mentioned in chapter 11.  We are thus assured of the end of the way we undertake.
The seed of Abraham would suggest persons who down here from day to day are committed to the will of God, and they know they can draw from the succour and sympathy and support of the Lord Jesus in His grace as Priest.  No matter what is involved in it, and sometimes there is a great deal of sorrow and heart-rending involved, there is One, dear brethren, whom we can draw from who has known sorrows such as we shall never know.  One who has suffered as we shall never suffer.  We are assured of His succour and His ability to strengthen us in our day-to-day path down here.  "For he does not indeed take hold of angels by the hand, but he takes hold of the seed of Abraham": in this sense He would take hold of us by the hand.  You remember in Matthew 14 Peter stepped out of the boat and began to walk on the waters to go to Jesus.  He could not sustain the walking on the water but began to sink, but he said, "Lord, save me", and Jesus stretched out His hand and caught hold of him.  He does not take hold of angels by the hand, but He takes hold of the seed of Abraham.  Peter was, in principle, of the seed of Abraham.  He had right desires.  He was attracted and attached to the Lord, for He was his object, but he needed to be taken hold of by the hand of the Priest.
That is a kind of illustration of the believer's path down here.  Sometimes we are confronted with sorrows and difficulties, troubles that seem impossible to face.  We have not the strength to face them, but in the assurance of the support of our Lord Jesus as Priest, in His sympathy, His love and grace, His faithfulness, we are able to go through as taken hold of by the hand.  It says, "Wherefore it behoved him in all things to be made like to his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest".  He is merciful and faithful.  It is remarkable how it is put.  It does not say 'faithful and merciful'; it is "merciful and faithful".  Think of the mercy, the grace, the tenderness of the Priest we have.  He is faithful, of course, but then He is merciful.  He will consider for us in every way and support us, especially as we are here for the will of God, involving some cost and some sacrifice on our part.  It says "in that himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to help those that are being tempted".  This epistle speaks about the Lord being made perfect through sufferings (Heb 2:10) as the Leader of our salvation, and salvation in this epistle would be a full matter, a daily matter.  The Lord is available for every one of His own inasmuch as the twelve tribes were on the breastplate of the high priest.  Not only does the breastplate suggest believers individually, but inasmuch as there were twelve tribes it might suggest localities.  The Lord Jesus is able to save us, to support us, individually and also to support and strengthen and sustain us in all our local exercises as we are committed to His will as being of the seed of Abraham.
Now in Hebrews 7 the same persons who are referred to as of the seed of Abraham are spoken of as those "who approach by him to God"; "Whence also he is able to save completely those who approach by him to God, always living to intercede for them".  They are those who approach by Him to God, which would involve that they are for God's pleasure.  It would involve what we speak of as the service of God.  Believers are meant to be down here committed to the will of God and they are meant to be persons who are available for the great matter of the service of God.  The first seven chapters in this epistle, as we have been taught, refer to the Priest as Minister of the holy places, who sustains the service of God and those who approach by Him to God.  The Lord said when He was here, "I am the way, the truth, and the life.  No one comes to the Father unless by me", John 14:6.  That must include His priesthood.  So the Lord's priesthood leads on to His being Minister of the holy places as Priest, as Aaron was in the Old Testament.  He was for the people, but he was also minister and sustained the whole service of God in the tabernacle system.  Let us be persons, therefore, who are here in day-to-day life, committed to the will of God in faith and obedience, as Abraham was, and let us be persons who are committed to be here in view of being available under the Lord's hand for the service of God.
Plainfield NJ
28th March 1978
{169}
SUPPLYING WHAT IS LACKING
@Luke 7:44-46; @1 Samuel 25:18,19; @1 Samuel 25:23,24; @1 Samuel 25:32,33; @1 Corinthians 16:15-18
I would like to say a few words about supplying what is lacking.  In the last verses we read it is persons who supplied 'what was lacking on your part', and that is a privilege open to us as believers at the present time to supply what is lacking.  You look around the world today -- the world that belongs to our Lord Jesus Christ -- He has rights in it, but they are denied Him.  There is a lack of acknowledgement of the rights of our Lord Jesus Christ.  There is a great need for each one of us to supply what is lacking.  In principle the assembly at the present time supplies what is lacking.  Well, I would like to encourage each one of us to be set to supply for Him what is lacking around us.
You find in this first scripture a tremendous lack in the Pharisee's house.  There is what he did not do: he ought to have done it, but he did not do it.  He may have boasted about having the Lord in his house, he may have attached the Lord's Name to his house, but think of the cold indifference that was in that house.  There was no appreciation of the Lord Jesus Christ in that house.  There was a tremendous lack -- what barrenness, what coldness!  It was not exactly that there was opposition, but there was just indifference -- no regard for the Person that was in it.
You think of mere profession around us, think of what the Lord's Name is attached to in the sense of profession, inviting the Lord into his house but having no regard for Him personally, and the very great lack was evident in this house.  But Luke tells us that, "a woman in the city, who was a sinner, and knew that he was sitting at meat in the house of the Pharisee, having taken an alabaster box of myrrh, and standing at his feet behind him weeping, began to wash his feet with tears; and she wiped them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the myrrh", vv  37, 38.  This poor, despised woman supplied the lack on the part of the Pharisee, and in the Pharisee's house.  The Pharisee resented her presence.  He complained about the woman and complained to the Lord that He allowed this woman to supply what was lacking on his part.
Now this Pharisee's house is just a picture of what mere profession is in the world around us.  We need to exhort one another and encourage one another to supply what is lacking.  You think of the fulness of supply there was with this woman.  You see the background of coldness, and such indifference to our Lord Jesus Christ in the world around us.  But it is the privilege of the young people here and, in fact, all of us, to be set to supply what is lacking -- how the Lord appreciates it!  The very background of indifference, you might also say, was only a background to bring to light, and into focus the supply of this woman.
It says, "And turning to the woman he said to Simon, Seest thou this woman?  I entered into thy house; thou gavest me not water on my feet".  I understand it was a common custom in those days for a guest to receive water to wash his feet, but what a lack there was in the house!  I trust there is not one of us here who would have part in this lack, lack of appreciation of our Lord Jesus Christ personally, lack of regard for the rights of our absent Lord.  How we need to be on the line of supply!  Think of the supply this woman brought with her, in a sense she herself was the supply.
It says in Luke's account of it, "having taken an alabaster box of myrrh, and standing at his feet behind him weeping, began to wash his feet with tears".  It was an expression of herself; she did not bring water with her, it was in herself, it was what she was, "and wiped them with the hairs of her head".  She represented the supply of what was lacking in the Pharisee's house.  Let us regard ourselves as in the Pharisee's house, and having the privilege of supplying what is lacking.  Our Lord Jesus Christ appreciated every movement of this woman in the way of supply.  It says, "Thou gavest me not a kiss, but she from the time I came in has not ceased kissing my feet".  This is the supply resident in one who was devoted to our Lord Jesus Christ.  What a need there is in our day for increased devotion!  "My head with oil thou didst not anoint, but she has anointed my feet with myrrh".  How the Lord appreciated the supplying of what was lacking.  There was nothing in the Pharisee's house but coldness, indifference, no regard for the Lord, but the woman comes in and brings in everything with her, brings in supplies of what was lacking.  Indeed, the way Luke records it, he records the supplies before he records the lack on the part of the Pharisee, he brings in the woman and what the woman did.  It is afterwards that the record tells us that the Pharisee did not do certain things.  Therefore, Luke focuses on the supply, then afterward tells of the lack.
Well, let us all be encouraged to be on the line of supplying what is lacking.  This is one who is devoted to the Lord, and by extension when the Lord says to her, "Thy faith has saved thee; go in peace", she would be devoted to the furtherance of His interests here, in the time of His absence.  Therefore, it was supplying what was lacking in this cold, indifferent atmosphere, which is the same as the time we are living in.
The addresses to the seven assemblies are often referred to and the last one is addressed to "the angel of the assembly in Laodicea" (@Romans 3:14), and what marked that state was indifference, neither cold not hot.  The Lord said to them, I would rather have you cold or hot.  A genuine believer might get cold sometimes, but then they could be rekindled, but neither cold nor hot is the indifferent state which is nauseous to the Lord Himself: "I am about to spue thee out of my mouth", the Lord says, Rev 3:16.  But meantime, even in these conditions in which we are, there are persons who are supplying what is lacking, and let us be among them.
Now 1 Samuel 25 is a very interesting chapter.  It is a chapter in which David makes a certain request from Nabal.  It was a perfectly righteous request.  In the history of David he did not make many requests but he does in this chapter, and Nabal insults Him.  It was an occasion when according to the description of one of Nabal's young men, "Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to bless our master; and he has insulted them", v 14.  It is a time when there is not only indifference to the Lord, but there is also insulting.  There is the rejection for the overtures of grace.  This is the kind of time we are living in -- what a lack there was with Nabal involving insult to David's men, therefore to David personally, and by application to our Lord Jesus Christ.  We are living in a time when He is insulted, terrible things are going on, cults are arising of all kinds, men are becoming more brazen in their opposition, in their demeaning the Name of Jesus, of our Lord Jesus Christ.  We are living in a time when our young people are being brought up in this kind of environment at school, in advertising and all that kind of thing, the books that are written, films are being shown that are derogatory to the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ.  It is an insult.
As I said, David did not make many requests of persons, but he made a request of Nabal and it brought out this insult.  David suggested perhaps that Nabal would show some response to himself.  Nabal and his men had taken all the benefits of David's protection.  David's men had been among them and nothing had been missed, as this young man had been saying, "They were a wall to us both by night and day, all the while we were with them feeding the sheep".  There are persons who are prepared to take all the benefits, but we are all challenged as to whether we are prepared to commit ourselves to the interests of our Lord Jesus Christ in a time when He is being insulted.  What a lack there is!
But Abigail comes in, and she richly supplies what was lacking.  You wonder where she got all these resources.  How great were the supplies that Abigail was able to bring forward.  It says, when Abigail was apprised of the situation, "Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves".  David asked for whatever comes to hand, "give, I pray thee, what thy hand may find to they servants, and to thy son David".  That is the request that David made.  But Abigail, wherever she got them, made haste and took two hundred loaves, and two skin-bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of parched corn, and a hundred raisin-cakes, and two hundred fig-cakes, and laid them on asses.  This is Abigail's great, rich supply of what was lacking in the whole general situation.  What a privilege we have, dear brethren.  I would like to exhort and encourage everyone to supply what is lacking.  No doubt Abigail felt the lack, felt the emptiness of any response from Nabal, and she had all this wealth of supply to fill up the lack that was there.
So she goes with the supplies to David, and then what a spirit she shows: she says, "Upon me, my lord, upon me let the iniquity be".  That is how she begins:  she was morally apart from Nabal, and yet she took the blame for a situation where there was such lack.  She took the responsibility for the lack, and then brought in all this rich supply.  She felt the lack.  We ought, as we go about this world and have contact with persons, and see what is going on, we ought in our hearts to feel the lack, and then be seen, as Abigail here, to supply what is lacking.
Think of a person like this discerning what is due to the Lord, discerning what is agreeable to Him.  How important this matter of discernment is!  It is what David called attention to in Abigail.
"Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me.  And blessed by thy discernment, and blessed be thou, who hast kept me this day from coming with bloodshed, and from avenging myself with mine own hand".  Even David was not true, was not acting according to the grace that really should have marked him, even he was dropping below the level.  Abigail's discernment was supplying even that lack, not only was she supplying the lack on the part of Nabal, but she was supplying some lack on the part of David.  She was supplying that in her discernment, "blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou".
Well, let us be set, dear brethren, to supply what is lacking, including discernment.  There was no discernment with Nabal, and there was a lack of discernment with David.  He is not in this matter a type of Christ, he is a type of the responsible element that falls below the level of the grace that marked the man in his normal life, but Abigail supplied that lack by way of her discernment.
In 1 Corinthians we find the expression used, "they have supplied what was lacking on your part".  Certain persons who were there supplied what was lacking on the part of the Corinthians.  Corinth, as we know, was a local assembly in those days.  We know the difficulties that were there in Corinth.  There was a lack and there may be certain things lacking in our local settings.  It would not be unusual for certain things to be lacking in a locality.  There is always room for improvement in our localities; things could always be better.  I do not know of any locality that could not be improved.  Therefore, in most of our localities there would be some feature lacking which could be improved.
What do we do?  Do we complain about it?  Do we complain about the lack if we discern it, do we give up because of the lack?  We need, dear brethren, to supply what is lacking!  That is a greater test.  Maybe we have sufficient understanding to see the lack and maybe we complain about it, but the great need is to supply what is lacking.
Paul at the end of his epistle calls attention to things that are lacking in this locality.  Some grave things were lacking at Corinth.  He calls attention to persons who were supplying what was lacking.  The house of Stephanas would not be much thought of.  No doubt the party leaders were more thought of in Corinth than these persons.  They might have been obscure persons, but Paul calls attention to them.  "Ye know the house of Stephanas that it is the first fruits of Achaia, and they have devoted themselves to the saints for service".  Not exactly devoted for service to the saints.  Service was not their objective, the saints were their objective, "they have devoted themselves to the saints for service, that ye should also be subject to such, and to every one joined in the work and labouring".  You see a household can be instrumental in supplying something that is lacking.  Persons can do it, and a household can do it.  These persons are models to be followed because they were supplying what was lacking.
I think we need to feel the lack in the world around us, whether it is in the form of indifference, or whether it is in the form of insult, and to set ourselves to supply that which is lacking.  Whether it is at school, or at business -- wherever it is -- supply something, bring in some supply that is suited to the heart of Christ.  So in our local settings let us all set ourselves to improve conditions on the principle of supply.  Not simply criticism, not simply complaining about it, but on the principle of supply.  May the Lord help us in it.
Chicago
8th April 1978
{175}
THE HOLY SPIRIT HOVERING, DESCENDING AND DWELLING
@Genesis 1:2; @Luke 3:21,22; @Luke 4:1; @Luke 4:14,15 @Romans 8:9-17
J.R.  I must say I was impressed this morning when someone made reference to the Spirit of God hovering over the face of the waters.  It says this very early in the Bible, in the second verse; obviously some evil power had operated, and the state was not that in which it was created.  We know that ages must have elapsed between verses 1 and 2 of Genesis 1: "And the earth was waste and empty, and darkness was on the face of the deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters".  Now that we know the Spirit of God as having come and indwelling us, we can perhaps look upon this verse certainly more intelligently than for instance Old Testament saints.  The Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters, and He was in the knowledge of what was about to take place.  No doubt divine feelings entered into it, the expression of divine feelings operating, no doubt anticipating what was about to come in divine intervention.  I just wondered about this verse and whether we could get a little help in conversing about it.  The Spirit of God is identified very early in the Scriptures.
J.McK.  I cannot say much about it, but there is something to enquire and get help about.
J.R.  We might enquire why the Spirit of God is identified so early in the Scriptures, and so active in a certain sense, in a feeling, sensitive and anticipative way, underlying divine operations which we have in this chapter, which were really operations in recovery.  It is divine intervention, and the Spirit of God hovering is God intervening and bringing order out of chaos.
J.McK.  The impression I have is that the Spirit could see what was there.  The scripture which comes to mind is in Romans 16, "the mystery, as to which silence has been kept in the times of the ages", v 25.  I wondered if there might be some connection with this in the idea of mystery?
J.R.  Yes, that is helpful.  There are a number of times when the mystery is mentioned.  It says that silence has been kept in the times of the ages; it was "hidden throughout the ages in God" (@Ephesians 3:9); I think that helps our enquiry, that the Spirit of God was in the secret of all that was in the divine mind, and hovering -- you might say affectionately -- with a view to all that coming to pass. We are all enquiring into this together, but I think there might be something in this, that we might appreciate the Spirit of God, who -- according to Romans 8 -- dwells in us.
J.McK.  I thought it was helpful in the outline in our brother's part this morning, that then there was a chaotic scene; but now He has gone on and the Spirit is dwelling in a sphere in which God is resting.
J.R.  That is fine; He is hovering anticipatively, is he not?  It is the same word, I understand, in Deuteronomy 32:11: "As the eagle stirreth up its nest, Hovereth over its young".  Well, the eagle hovereth over its young, seeing what is potential in the young and anticipating something developing; something happening, maturity coming in.  "As the eagle stirreth up its nest, Hovereth over its young"; there is affection in it, intense interest.  If we only realised the intense interest of the Spirit of God in each one of us, it would help us: the active interest of the Spirit of God in each one of us, with a view to our coming into all the wealth that He is able to give us the enjoyment of.  We enjoy things, and experience things, by the Spirit.  We have to lay hold of certain blessings by faith, but then the enjoyment of them is in the Spirit; and He would hover -- to use this expression -- with a view to us coming into the fulness of the wealth of what He would cause us to enjoy.  It is all in Christ of course: Mr Raven taught that every divine blessing is firstly in the mind of God, secondly established in Christ, and thirdly enjoyed by the Spirit.
S.McC.  I am following.  I think it is interesting that, immediately after verse 2, where the Spirit of God is hovering over the face of the waters, we should get verse 3: "God said, let there be light".  Then for centuries, these things went together all through the Old Testament: the Spirit was hovering; actually, looking for Christ.  "And God said, Let there be light. And there was light" -- that was when Christ came in: "And God said, Let there be light".
J.R.  That is very fine, because there was physical chaos in verse 2, but moral chaos came in in chapter 3: it is a more serious condition even than the physical one and requires the working out morally of good and evil, does it not?  What you say is very suggestive, as to the Spirit of God hovering throughout the whole of the Old Testament, anticipating the coming in of Christ.
J.McK.  So in chapter 8 of Genesis, the dove found no resting place for the sole of her foot and it returned to Noah into the ark.  Is that what is being said being carried out figuratively in the dove?  The conditions on the earth were not yet ready for the reception of the Spirit.
J.R.  Yes quite so, no dwelling place.  It says that he sent out the raven, but he sent the dove "from him", and then the dove returned "to him"; "and he put forth his hand, and took her, and brought her to him into the ark", Gen 8:9.  There was a kind of affinity between Noah and the dove, which there was not between Noah and the raven.  It suggests this intense interest, and affection, and sympathetic affinity.  The Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters in full sympathy and affinity with divine objectives, divine purpose.
J.McK.  What you said as to divine feelings, I can recall Mr James Taylor saying that divine feelings were expressed in the Spirit of God hovering; and how conditions might be found for Him to dwell in.
J.R.  Quite so.  There is depth in it; there is depth in the Spirit of God hovering over the face of the waters.  And the depth that was referred to in the Spirit of God awaiting anticipatively, sympathetically, the coming in of Christ in the beginning of the gospels, where He is spoken of as a dove.  As we read in Luke 4, it says "the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove upon him".  The Spirit of God was not sent there; He descended, it was His own volition; it was affinity, this expression of affinity and divine feelings.  And intense interest manifested itself in the Holy Spirit descending "in a bodily form as a dove upon him".  The activity of the Holy Spirit, and the Father's voice; there is a wonderful affinity there -- oneness, the oneness of divine interest.
S.McC.  It is very interesting that the affinity that exists between the Persons of the Trinity was seen at the moment of the incarnation of Christ.
J.R.  Is this the first time that we have the Trinity -- with Jesus here in Manhood?  I mean the Trinity expressed: Jesus here in Manhood, the Spirit descending, and the Father's voice.  It is a wonderful moment, is it not?  We know of course that the Trinity always existed, but this is the opening up of it.  It is a wonderful matter to consider.
J.McK.  Reference has been made to Peter's word, as to Cornelius and those who were hearing the word: "the Holy Spirit fell on all those who were hearing the word", @Acts 10:44.
J.R.  Has it not been likened to the father falling upon the neck of the younger son, in Luke 15?  Again it shows the affinity, the father falling upon the neck of the younger son; and the Spirit falling upon those who were hearing the word.
J.McK.  I was only going to remark that it was the Spirit's own intervention, which helped us to see that there was a divine Person; He is not always seen in a place of subjection.  It was remarked that we cannot limit Christ to the place of a bondman; and in the same way, we cannot limit the place the Spirit has taken; He is free to act at any time.
J.R.  Sovereignty belongs to each of the Persons of the Godhead.  Hebrews refers to "distributions of the Holy Spirit, according to his will" (chap 2:4); it is the sovereignty of the Spirit.  The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit delight in sovereignty, each One; but here the Holy Spirit is not presented as sent, it is His own volition, you might say His own spontaneous movement.
G.T.  I was thinking of the perfect order of man, that he could descend upon a man, without any reserve.
J.R.  That is right, come as a dove.  When he was sent at Pentecost, He came as tongues of fire, but here there was complacency -- as a dove; everything was complacent in Jesus as a Man here.  He was a Man of another order.
G.T.  Yes, an order that was suitable.
J.R.  Yes, it is interesting too that it is at the moment when the Lord identifies Himself with the godly remnant in baptism.  It is at that moment that the Spirit descends, and the Father's voice is heard.  I do not know what is to be said about that, but it says, "all the people having been baptised, and Jesus having been baptised and praying".
S.McC.  I think it brings in the pleasure of God with Christ, and His identification with the remnant; the peculiar pleasure of the Father and the Spirit.
J.R.  So you think you might say that the Holy Spirit was feelingly anticipating all that would come out of this remnant, the potential that was there, the possibilities that were there?  Everything was of course in Christ, but those He was identified with.  The assembly came to light as a result.  In the early Acts, it was a remnant; the assembly was initiated by a remnant of the Jews.
W.S.C.  Simeon says, "a light for revelation of the Gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel", @Luke 2:22.  I am wondering if what is seen in Jesus is not the answer to the creation -- the light, the sun and the moon, the fruit-bearing trees -- everything is seen in Him?
J.R.  That is right -- light and life; vegetable life, and then life in the waters and in the air -- contrary elements -- life expressed there, swarming with life.  And then of course man, the great objective of God.
W.S.C.  Is that the meaning of "the beginning of the creation of God", Rev 3:14?
J.R.  I suppose it is, it is a remarkable expression.  Of course, you can understand the Lord being the beginning of new creation, but I think it refers too to the beginning of creation.  He was in mind from the very beginning: "all things have been created by him and for him", Col 1:16.  In a sense, He was the beginning.
J.McK.  It is very encouraging to see what came from heaven; scientists would tell you that the earth evolved itself, but at the incoming of Christ, the angel, speaking first to Zacharias said, "I am Gabriel, who stand before God" (@Luke 1:9); but coming to Mary, the angel Gabriel was "sent of God".  I think there is an interesting connection and what comes from God, but in the way of His purpose, it is a matter of what is sent.  The angel standing before Zechariah is indicative of God's dealings with Israel by the angels; now we have it by the Holy Spirit.
J.R.  Quite so.
J.McK.  So these feelings that you are speaking about, I think we should be more ourselves in the gain of them, because we have the Spirit dwelling with us.
J.R.  Exactly.  I have thought that "I am Gabriel, who stand before God" was Gabriel's answer to the unbelief of Zacharias.  Zacharias was exercising priesthood, in that sense he was standing before God, and he was unbelieving as to the message that was brought to him.  But "the angel answering, said to him, I am Gabriel, who stand before God, and I have been sent to speak to thee, and to bring these glad tidings to thee; and behold, thou shalt be silent".  He seems to be surprised that here was Zacharias, standing before God in his priestly service and unbelieving; and here was Gabriel: "I am Gabriel, who stand before God".
G.T.  Why does it add as to praying: "Jesus having been baptised and praying"?
J.R.  Well, you spoke of a man that was here, a perfect man; and in dependence?  It was delightful to heaven to see a man in complete dependence: "and praying", it says, identified with the remnant.  He was going to undertake the work of redemption that would release this remnant from all that encumbered them.  And he is praying -- we find many times in Luke that Jesus is praying; there is a perfect, dependent, subject Man.
W.H.C.  I am very much enjoying what is being said.  This thought of hovering I had never heard it discussed that much.  It is presented as a deliberate act.  Mr James Taylor said in this city once that the Lord could have been at Jerusalem after He broke the bread with the two at Emmaűs; He could have been there instantly, but He waited for them to get there.  It was a deliberate act on the part of the Lord.  And I like what is being said, as to a deliberate act of the Holy Spirit -- he is not flying or diving or standing, but hovering.
J.R.  Quite so, I think it is; it is the attitude of deliberating, of waiting -- perhaps preparing the ground in a sense, may be; creating an environment?
J.McK.  When the Lord Jesus is to be identified, the Holy Spirit descended.
J.R.  It says, "the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form".  The "bodily form" would be interesting too -- "God gives not the Spirit by measure" (John 3:34); "in a bodily form" is a remarkable thing.
J.McK.  It is complete, full identification.
J.R.  Quite so.
W.H.C.  It has certain characteristics; a dove is not a crow.  Mr James Taylor said that the Lord looked at Peter with a dove's eye.  He might have gone out and killed himself, but Jesus looked at him with a dove's eye.
J.R.  It speaks as to that reference we have made to the dove with Noah that "the dove found no resting-place for the sole of her foot"; now the sole of the foot is very sensitive.  The idea of a dove would be sensitiveness; anything inconsistent she would be sensitive to.  But it found everything complacent in Jesus here -- in a bodily form "as a dove".  It says in another gospel that it abode upon him; the idea is that there was perfect complacency for the Spirit of God.
W.H.C.  It is in keeping with the lamb; a lamb is not a predatory beast, it is not dangerous.  It shows cleanliness, and so with the dove and it is really without pretension.  It is not a bird of prey.  It is a similar kind of thing, is it not?
J.R.  Yes, you never heard of a lamb causing any damage.
W.H.C.  No, nor a dove.
S.McC.  It is interesting that the feminine gender is used so much in connection with the Spirit.  God is known as Father, but with the Spirit it would emphasise the subjective side of operations in relation to what He is going to produce.
J.R.  Quite so.  There is the woman in Luke 15; and the dove and the sole of her foot.  That is very interesting; it is with a view to a subjective result for the heart of Christ.  He would therefore have an affinity with the heart of Christ, His longings.  It says, "he found no helpmate, his like", Gen 2:20.  There were certain longings in His heart, what we might call a vacancy, and longings, in His heart; and it was supplied.  So with the eagle hovering over her young; it would be the mother, I suppose, the motherly feature.
S.McC.  It would help us currently to understand and appreciate more the place that the Spirit of God has in producing what is subjective in answer to the heart of Christ.
J.R.  Yes, that is very important.  Is not the presence of the Spirit one of the characteristic features of Christianity?  It is a great feature -- the Headship of Christ in heaven and the Spirit here.
S.McC.  That brings out the difference between Christendom and Christianity, because Christianity involves the presence and power of the Spirit.  Christendom has not given place to the Spirit; you have the knowledge of the clergyman that comes in.  But the Spirit's presence is to be known in the assembly.
J.R.  Exactly, it is the vital thing.
J.McK.  Where the rights of Christ are acknowledged, you find that the Spirit is free, and finds a place to rest "the sole of her foot".
J.R.  In John 1, John says, "I beheld the Spirit descending as a dove from heaven, and it abode upon him", John 1:32.  It is the abiding presence of Jesus here; everything complacent, nothing uncongenial: a resting place for "the sole of her foot".
In Romans 8, it brings in that the Spirit of God dwells in you.  Three times, it speaks about dwelling: verse 9 -- "if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you"; and then in verse 11, "if the Spirit of him that has raised up Jesus from among the dead dwell in you, he that has raised up Christ from among the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also on account of his Spirit which dwells in you".  It is the possibility of the believer providing dwelling conditions for the Spirit.
S.McC.  Is the fact of the worship of God being linked to the Spirit an important thing to pay attention to: "For we are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God" (Phil 3:3), or worship God by the Spirit?  The Spirit is the power, is He not?  It brings in that there is a subjective side to the service of God that we need to pay attention to.
J.R.  I am sure that is right.  The Spirit is the One of the Trinity who has come to be active in us.  The Lord Jesus is with us mediately; that is, He is personally absent, but the Spirit is with us immediately, dwelling in our bodies -- "ye are the temple of God, and … the Spirit of God dwells in you", @1 Corinthians 3:16.  He has come so near.  Much depends on what kind of conditions we provide for Him to dwell in.  What you refer to comes out here: "But Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and was led by the Spirit in the wilderness" -- led in the power of the Spirit.  It is a mark of the dependent Man, the Man who was praying: the Spirit descended upon Him, and He is led in the power of that same Spirit in the wilderness forty days.  And then He "returned in the power of the Spirit to Galilee" (v 14), after having defeated the enemy in His perfection.  The enemy could not find any inroad: "the ruler of the world comes, and in me he has nothing", John 14:30.  He had no way of inroad to the Lord here.  We know of course that He has a way of inroad to us; we know that too well.
J.McK. As to the Spirit coming in the Acts where it sat upon them, it says, "there came suddenly a sound out of heaven as of a violent impetuous blowing, and filled all the house", @Acts 2:2.  I am getting a distinct sense in my mind of divine purpose and the counsel of God; and that the Spirit is vital for the fulfilment of everything that God had in His mind, not only for the blessing of the saints but a place for divine Persons to dwell.
J.R.  I think that is very important; so that, when we respond to the Spirit as we did this morning, the service of God would not be complete without some response to the Spirit.  We are responding to Him, not only because of what He accomplishes for us, and the debt we owe Him, but what He produces for the divine pleasure.  We therefore by expression reflect something of the Lord's appreciation of the Spirit, and the Father's appreciation.  We come into line with the appreciation of the father and the Son, which is a great thing for God.
S.McC.  So we have this remarkable, tender expression as to the Father and the Spirit: "whereby we cry, Abba, Father", by the Spirit.
J.R.  Exactly; "The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are children of God".  That is the normal activity of the Spirit.  You think of the Spirit constantly bearing witness with our spirits; it is very intimate.  There is no intermediary there; it is the immediate operation of the Spirit, assuring our hearts.
G.T.  There is something mysterious in what has been referred to in the Acts: "there came suddenly a sound out of heaven as of a violent impetuous blowing".  And there are those born of the Spirit, it says that "the wind blows where it will" (John 3:8), He is hovering.  I was reading about the parted tongues, where it says "parted tongues, as of fire, and it sat upon each one of them"; Mr James Taylor said that was not the tongues but the Spirit that sat on each one of them.
J.R.  And this is the inauguration of Christianity; the Spirit coming as sent according to the divine arrangement in the Economy.  When the Lord Jesus was here, he was the sent One, he speaks of Himself in that way as the sent One of the Father.  In the present arrangement of the divine Economy, the Spirit is the sent One.  He was sent at Pentecost, and He is still here; He has not returned.  Therefore, if as believers we receive the Spirit, it is as the Spirit is in believers here; rather than from heaven.  So, as he receives the Spirit, he is linked with other believers who have the Spirit in the vital link of life.
G.T.  So Jesus Himself said "It is profitable for you that I go away" (John 16:17); because both the Father and the Son are engaged in sending the Spirit, which is the wonderful way in which divine Persons are one.  It is a beautiful thing to think about.  Peter on another occasion questioned what the Lord said about His death, but the Lord says, "it is profitable for you that I go".
J.R.  The presence of the Spirit depends on the absence of Christ; and the more we feel the absence of Christ, the more we will be able to realise the presence of the Spirit.  If we do not feel the absence of Christ, we will not be able to realise the presence of the Spirit.  The two go together, you could not have the one without the other.  We are better off with the Spirit here than they were when they had the Lord here.  That may be difficult to accept, but it is what the Lord says, and it is the truth.  It is the present arrangement in the divine Economy; and it is the best for our progress in spiritual things.
W.H.C.  So He says, "It is profitable for you that I go away".
J.R.  "It is profitable for you that I go away; for if I do not go away, the Comforter will not come to you; but if I go I will send him to you".  We have the presence of the Spirit because of the Lord's absence; that has been the arrangement of the divine Economy since Pentecost in Acts 2.  The Spirit is here as sent; He is sent of the Godhead in the present time.  We need to be intelligent as to the present arrangement in the divine Economy.  It is in view of securing the assembly.  I sometimes wonder why the time of the Spirit has been so long: for nearly two thousand years, this has been the arrangement of the divine Economy; it is the longest of all the dispensations that we know -- why should it be?  It is because of the greatness of the capacity of the vessel that is being formed.  That capacity will be seen in the world to come; and it will be for the heart of Christ and for the pleasure of God for eternity.  It has taken two thousand years to form it because of the greatness of the capacity of the vessel.  We perhaps little realise the capacity of the vessel, the assembly.
S.McC.  Exactly; that is why the assembly's place is the greatest of all the families in the universe; because she has the Spirit, and the Spirit has been forming her, capacitating her for the glory -- the glory of God, "having the glory of God", Rev 21:10.
J.R.  Exactly: "having the glory of God".  That is what is being absorbed now; the glory of God is being absorbed now through the service of the Spirit.  It will be manifested in the world to come, "having the glory of God".
J.McK.  Then we have the Spirit's service in Ephesians 2: "we have … access by one Spirit to the Father" (v 18); and then we "are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit", v 22.  The Spirit's service is vital to the Father and to Christ, in order for them to find an answer to their own hearts.
J.R.  Exactly: God dwells in a habitation here by the Spirit, and that is composed of believers who have the Spirit in the broadest sense.  Whether every believer realises that he forms part of the habitation of God would be another matter; and whether we who do realise that we form the habitation in the Spirit are really concerned to provide habitable conditions for Him is another matter.  We can see it abstractly, but then it is meant to affect us, and this matter of dwelling is important.
Rem.  I am thinking of what you are saying about dwelling conditions.
J.R.  I am sure that is right, quite so.  It is a question of what conditions we individually provide in our bodies for the Spirit; how we arrange our affairs -- because we are responsible.  The Spirit will not do anything for us.  It says here, "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God".  But before it says that, it says, "if, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye shall live", as if in the practical working out of it, there is a need of negation of the deeds of the body.  As far as I can see, that verse seems to hang together: "if, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye shall live: for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God".  There has to be the negation, and the refusal, and the repudiation of certain activities so that the Spirit may be free to lead us.  And we have power by the Spirit to negate and repudiate these things.  The Spirit will not do it for us, and we cannot do it in our own power; it is a question of learning how to use the Spirit to negate the deeds of the body, so that we are led by the Spirit of God.
J.McK.  In Ephesians 5, the apostle writes, "And be not drunk with wine, in which is debauchery; but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and chanting with your heart to the Lord;" (v 18, 19), the Spirit is the motive power.
J.R.  That is right: "filled with the Spirit" is a very testing expression, that is, there is no room for anything else.  And really that is normal Christianity; we think of it as something extraordinary that we will never attain while are here, but really that is normal Christianity.  It was at the beginning at Pentecost, and the Ephesians are exhorted to be filled with the Spirit.
J.McK.  It says of Stephen that he was "full of the Holy Spirit", @Acts 6:5.  That is how he was sustained.
J.R.  Very good, and when it says that, it says, "be not drunk with wine"; it is the negation of certain influences.  It is important that we learn by the Spirit to refuse things, and so the positive works in us.
J.McK.  It was what you were saying, that brought this to mind, that we put things off that hinder the Spirit in His service; as was remarked, this is Christianity not Christendom.  I feel now for myself -- I am sure we all do -- the need as a result of this meeting together to consider more, to contemplate more what the Spirit is in this dispensation for the glory of God and the help of the saints.
J.R.  That is right, and the intention of God in the present arrangement of the Economy is that we should become spiritual persons.  Eventually, the assembly will be a spiritual vessel; there will be nothing naturally.  It will be a thoroughly spiritual vessel, and that is why the Spirit of God is given to us, that that may result.  It will be so in the end; we will not have bodies of flesh and blood.  In the world to come there will be a flesh and blood condition here, not a perfect condition on the earth; but the assembly will be entirely spiritual; no longer flesh and blood, no longer what is natural, it will be a thoroughly spiritual vessel.  And it is the divine purpose that we should become spiritual now.
G.T.  I was thinking of what it says at the end: "the Spirit and the bride say, Come" (Rev 22:17); there is something formed, there is unison.
J.R.  There is an affinity: "the Spirit and the bride say, Come"; it is one voice.  That is the great result.  I think there is a great need for all of us to appreciate the present divine arrangements and the Spirit on our side; the Spirit is immediately available to us.  It is by the Spirit that we are linked with Christ in heaven.   Faith links us with Christ in heaven; but then experimentally, and in life, it is the Spirit that links us with Christ in heaven.
G.T.  Zechariah said, "Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts", Zech 4:6.
J.R.  "The word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, and my Spirit, remain among you" (Hag 2:5), and that is what we can say now, in spite of all the breakdown, all the failure that has gone on; God would say "my Spirit" remains among you.  And everything depends on how much room we give to the Spirit, individually and in our local gatherings.
J.McK.  So we can understand as to what God is Himself: "Be ye holy, for I am holy", @1 Peter 1:16.  These are the conditions which give the Spirit freedom, not only collectively among us, but each individual is to be characterised by the sense that holiness is what God is Himself.
J.R.  So that believers are meant to be sanctified vessels; our bodies are to be sanctified vessels and we are meant to be a sanctified company.  And that depends upon the Spirit dwelling.
K.A.K.  I was thinking a while back when you were speaking of things being carried, and the Spirit hovering, how Elisha desired a double portion of the spirit of Elijah, the man of God (2 Kings 2:9); as though he desired to have what was necessary to carry things through, and then he was given the ephod.
J.R.  That is good, because in our soul history we need to come to a point where we feel the need of the Spirit; and we will not come to that point until we are committed to the will of God, what is pleasing to God and providing conditions for Him.  It is not until we set our face in that direction that we will find that we need the Spirit.  The Lord in John's gospel chapters 14-16 anticipates the coming of the Spirit, and assures them that He will be their Comforter and their help; but when they were found in the beginning of the Acts in the Lord's absence, then they would feel the need of the Spirit.  While they had the Lord with them, they would not exactly feel the same way the need of the Comforter's presence, but it is in the Lord's absence.  We are left here in the Lord's absence, and the only thing that makes up for the absence of Christ is the presence of the Spirit.
K.A.K.  I was just impressed by that section where it speaks of Elisha desiring that; and the result is really for God because you have the continuance of the man of God.
J.R.  He was concerned: Elijah was going up - who was going to be left here and in what power could he continue?  It was only with a double portion of his spirit; and we live in the time of the double portion.  It is the firstborn family that is being formed; it is the time of the double portion.  We have the hymn --
The double portion we enjoy
(Hymn 261)
 -- is that not the present time?
K.A.K.  There was a testimony involved too; whether he saw what was transpiring.
J.R.  It was whether he saw Elijah being taken up; so the question is whether our objective is Christ in heaven and what is pleasing to Him; and the continuation of the features of that Man down here.  And then we see that the only power that is available, the only power that can help us, is the power of the Spirit.  It is then that we begin to value the Spirit.  If we are just jogging along in an indifferent kind of way, we will not feel any need for the Spirit.  It is when we are committed to the path of God's will, and then the only power for it -- even when we have to come to decisions, or in preachings or meetings -- the only power to maintain these conditions is the power of the Spirit.
J.McK.  So the woman who was a wife of the prophet says, "Thy handmaid has not anything at all in the house but a pot of oil", 2 Kings 4:2.  She did not know what she had, and I feel that many of us when we were younger did not value what we had in the Spirit, by which we can all cry "Abba, Father".
J.R.  It is the possibilities of the Spirit.  She did not realise -- "not anything at all … but a pot of oil".  She was to gather vessels, and they were all filled, and the oil stayed.  There is infinite capacity in the Spirit.
J.McK.  She was to fill the vessels.
J.R.  The prophet said, "Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt" (v 7), as if the vessels were the means of meeting her obligation; but then there was far more than that -- "live thou and thy sons on the rest"; there was abundance to live on.  It was not only to fulfil her obligations, not only to fulfil righteousness -- there was ample provision for that; but also to live, "thou and thy sons on the rest".  It is all debts clear, all obligations fulfilled; and then life.
K.A.K.  He said, "let it not be few" (v 3); that would show what is available for us.  We sometimes restrict the scope, but it is the power of what God can do.
J.R.  The only limitation was the number of vessels: if there had been twice the number of vessels, they would all have been filled.  Whatever they had available was filled, and more if needed.
J.McK.  So that in our respective local meetings, if we use what is available, we can all get help.
Chicago
9th April 1978
Key to initials - Chicago unless otherwise shown:-
W.H.Chellberg; W.S.Chellberg; K.A.Knauss, Indianapolis; S.McCallum, Villa Grove; J.McKillop; J.Renton, Edinburgh; G.Tickle, Council Bluffs
The record of this meeting does not identify the speakers; and there is uncertainty about some instances
This article and the one following are first published here, lightly edited and not revised by Mr Renton
{190}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD
@Luke 17:20,21; @Romans 14:17
I desire to say a few words about the kingdom of God in two connections, or at least in two ways.  First of all, the kingdom of God is God's own intervention; God has intervened in the history of this world by means of His kingdom.  On the one hand, we have God's intervention, and on the other, the means God has of regulating persons.  There are two features that have marked God's dealing with men: the one is intervention, and the other is regulation.  You can trace these through the Scriptures.  You take the first chapter of Genesis, where God said "let there be light" (v 3); there surely was intervention: in the midst of the darkness and the chaos, God said "let there be light", there was divine intervention.  And if there had not been divine intervention, there would be darkness and chaos continuing to this very day.  But God in His goodness intervened physically and said, "let there be light": what an intervention that was!  And then there was an ordered, regulated system of things; there was the sun and the moon ruling: the sun to rule the day and the moon to rule the night.  That preserved the physical universe from further chaos, because there was regulation; first of all, there was intervention, and then there was regulation.  It is a wonderful thing to think that this earth is regulated; this earth in which we live is regulated by the sun and the moon.  Without the sun and the moon, it would revert to chaos -- physically, I mean; it is the principle of regulation.
Take the history of Joseph, the history of Egypt: God intervened.  The famine was coming, and God intervened by means of Joseph; through his wisdom, he was given pre-eminence in the land of Egypt.  That was God's intervention; but then the decree was, "according to thy commandment shall all my people regulate themselves", Gen 41:40.  There was not only intervention, but there was regulation.  When the children of Israel were in Egypt, God intervened and brought His people out of Egypt, and brought in regulation to maintain them in the wilderness.  The manna came every morning, even when they rebelled, even when they were unfaithful and departed; every morning the manna came; every morning when they rose up, they found the manna, even rebellious as they were.  The manna was an intervention, for feeding and regulation.
Now, in the kingdom of God we have this principle of intervention.  God has intervened in His mercy, and His grace to men, and He has established a kingdom.  In this first scripture that we read, the Pharisees are asking about the kingdom of God.  The kingdom was a promise; God had promised that there would be a kingdom.  Daniel said, "And in the days of these kings shall the God of the heavens set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed … itself shall stand for ever", Dan 2:44.  He spoke about other kingdoms that have come and gone -- Babylon, the Medes and Persians, and the Grecian and the Roman have come and gone -- kingdoms of nations have come and gone, but there is a kingdom established that will never be destroyed.  It was promised in the Old Testament and these Pharisees had some light as to it, and they asked when it was to be manifested.  And Jesus said, "the kingdom of God is in the midst of you"; the kingdom of God had come.  And how true it is today, that the kingdom of God has come.  God has been pleased to intervene by the coming into manhood of our Lord Jesus Christ: by that blessed, perfect Man that we have been speaking about today, the dependent One, every movement He made and every word He spoke was in the light of the mind of God; and not only what He was externally, but what He was inwardly -- every motive He had, every feeling He had inwardly was thoroughly in keeping with the mind of God, and was altogether for the pleasure of God.  What a Man Jesus was when He was here; what an intervention!  Darkness on the face of the deep, moral darkness; and light came in: "I am the light of the world" (John 8:12), Jesus could say.  Not only did He live here a perfect life, but He undertook the great work of redemption that the kingdom should be established, that persons could righteously come into this kingdom.  The crux of it, shall we say, the whole work of it, was undertaken by our Lord Jesus Christ, in His sufferings, in His death, in the outpouring of His precious blood.  You think of Him sustaining being forsaken of God; He sustained the penalty of death, poured out His precious blood, was buried: all these movements on the part of the Lord Jesus.  He became the willing Victim that there might be a righteous foundation for the kingdom of God.  He is no longer in the grave, He was raised from among the dead by the glory of the Father and highly exalted; and the kingdom exists today.  The Lord's words when He was here were, "the kingdom of God is in the midst of you".  We might say today, "the kingdom of God is in the midst of you"; the kingdom of God is available for every one here.  It is available for every man, woman and child; it is the great result of God's intervention, that the kingdom of God exists.  It does not yet exist publicly; it has not yet come by observation.  It is here in mystery; nevertheless it is here.  A day is coming when the kingdom is going to be established publicly, when those who have refused the glad tidings of the kingdom of God will come under the severest of judgment; and the whole scene will be cleared in judgment.  The kingdom of God will be set up, and the Lord Jesus Christ will be pre-eminent publicly for a thousand years.  And He will maintain order, peace, prosperity in this very earth in which we are.  Men are baffled, statesmen are baffled.  Some people say they long for the sort of statesmen there were in the last century, and so on; the fact of the matter is that the best statesmen who ever lived could not do anything in the present chaotic state of things amongst men.  There is such a rising tide of organised lawlessness threatening government; government is weak in the presence of the organisations of lawlessness in the world.  There is only One that can settle it; and that is the Lord Jesus Christ, and He will settle it for God's glory and the blessing of men.  That is when the kingdom is set up publicly, but nevertheless at the present time is a reality as a result of the intervention of God, as a result of the completion of the work that the Lord Jesus undertook, and the fact that He is highly exalted.
Now, the kingdom is available for every repentant sinner; every sinner who repents, every one who owns allegiance to our Lord Jesus Christ, every one who confesses Him as Lord, the kingdom of God is available for such to come into for their protection, in order to regulate persons.  The great One who regulates persons -- the true Joseph -- is our Lord Jesus Christ.  The will of God is done in His kingdom; the kingdom is the area where God's will is done, where, as has been said, 'the moral sway of God' (FER vol 3 p280), the kingdom of God is down here.  Would you be in this kingdom?  Would you be committed to the Lord Jesus Christ as Lord, and confess Him as Lord?  Would you come by way of being one of His disciples into God's kingdom?  What a wonderful area it is; it is an area where there is divine regulation.  Just the same principles that will apply in the world to come when the kingdom is set up publicly apply now in that area.  Things will be divinely regulated in the world in the age to come; the Lord Jesus is willing to regulate every one of us.
Now what we read in Romans is that "the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking"; it is not a material thing, but the first word it says is "righteousness".  Now what sinners need is righteousness.  They may not realise that, they may think that their needs lie elsewhere, but the sinner needs righteousness.  He needs to have a righteous standing that God can view him as righteous.  You say, Is that possible -- I who am a guilty sinner: is it possible that God can view me as righteous?  It is if I repent: righteousness is available; it is in the mind of God for every man, righteousness.  It is established in Christ; it is realised in the power of the Holy Spirit.  "The kingdom of God is not eating and drinking but righteousness".  It is not only the standing before God in righteousness, but regulation as in God's kingdom, regulated by the authority of the Lord Jesus Christ, by subjection to Him, by being committed to being here for His pleasure; not for our own pleasure, not doing our own will, but as committed to the will of God, there is the regulation of righteousness.  It has been spoken about as like planets in orbit around the sun; it is righteousness, it is regulation, it is the regulation of the sun, it is the law of gravity.  You might say that it is mysterious; it is the law of gravity that maintains the planets in their orbit round the sun.  And so the believer who is in the kingdom of God is regulated by his attachment -- by the mysterious power of attachment and affection for our Lord Jesus Christ.  He is maintained regulated in righteousness down here.
Now, that is not just a glorious impossibility; it is available for every repentant sinner who comes and commits himself in faith to the Lord Jesus and to the will of God down here.  This kingdom is available now, and this righteousness, the regulation of righteousness.  You think what that means to God, to see believers down here in regulation in righteousness.  You think of the lawlessness in the world around us, and each one of us -- even believers -- have a lawless nature.  We need the Spirit of God to maintain us in this divine regulation, which we are speaking about, which is found in the kingdom of God.
And then it says "peace", peace with God -- it is a great matter to be at peace.  It does not mean that we will not have griefs, we will not have sorrows; there will be difficulties to face.  The path of discipleship was never meant to be easy; it was never an armchair affair.  There will be difficulties to meet and burdens to carry, and sorrows to bear; but the kingdom of God is peace, as regulated by the Lord Jesus Christ, as maintained in our committal to Him in the power of the Holy Spirit, there is peace -- a deep peace.  The hymn says,
It is well, it is well with my soul.
(Hymn 238)
 -- even when there are difficulties, when trials come, there is peace in the kingdom of God.  It is a great matter to commit things to God, to leave things in God's hands, trusting in God.  That is the way of peace, and this is found in the kingdom of God.
And then it says, "joy in the Holy Spirit"; there is satisfaction, satisfaction of soul.  There is the satisfaction of every right desire in the kingdom of God.  Remember that woman in John 4 -- I think of that incident when I think of joy in the Holy Spirit; the Lord says to her, "whosoever drinks of the water which I shall give him shall never thirst for ever, but the water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life", John 4:14.  It is the drinking of the living water.  Now, this does not mean drinking once and for all: the Lord says, whosoever "drinks" of the water which I shall give him.  It is not a question simply of having received the Spirit; it may be weeks ago, or months ago, or years ago.  It is a constant matter, it is a characteristic matter: "whosoever drinks of this water"; there is satisfaction in drinking of the living water, of deriving constantly "joy in the Holy Spirit" -- "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit".  What wonderful regulation, kept in orbit with regard to our Lord Jesus Christ, held in the power of gravity, in the power of attraction to our Lord Jesus personally, and maintained here in the power of the Holy Spirit.
Well, may the Lord help us to have some light as to God's kingdom existing now, and to desire to enter it, and to be maintained in it; to appreciate what has come in through God's intervention and come under divine regulation.
For His Name's sake.
Chicago
9th April 1978
First published here, lightly edited and not revised by Mr Renton
{195}
DEPENDENCE AND JUDGMENT
@John 5:30; @John 7:16-18
The Lord Jesus said as Man here, "I cannot do anything of myself".  He was the One who created the universe, by whom God made the worlds, Heb 1:2.  We think of the greatness of His Person and then read a verse like this, and we wonder.  It shows the place the Lord took as Man here; the place He took in the divine economy.  He came into the place of subjection and obedience as a Man here.  If the Lord Jesus was here in dependence, how necessary for us that we should be dependent.  I have been impressed by the thought that the setting in which the Lord was here in relation to His Father is the setting in which we are to be in relation to the Lord when He is absent.  If the Lord could say "I cannot do anything of myself", we have to learn how much more true it ought to be of us!  The Lord said in chapter 15:5, "without me ye can do nothing".  As believers we have to learn what dependence is.
If there is one thing we need, dear brethren, it is the element of judgment.  Judgment here is righteous -- "as I hear, I judge".  As He heard from His Father, He judged.  We need to know what right judgment is; it involves discernment and discrimination.  We need to know first of all how to judge ourselves.  We speak about self-judgment, but that is not having our own standard.  We are to regulate ourselves by His word.  The word of God is living and operative, Heb 4:12.  It divides between soul and spirit.  It is in allowing God's word to have its effect in our very inwards that we are able to judge ourselves and to judge other things.  The Lord speaks of judgment on a moral basis -- "I do not seek my will, but the will of him that has sent me".  We need to be fully committed to the will of God to have a right judgment.  The Lord therefore is a perfect example for us.  There was no element of preference or prejudice with Him, but these things come in and affect our judgment.  There was never anyone so single-eyed as the Lord Jesus.  He never deviated from God's will.  He was ever in perfection devoted to God's will.  We do well to feed on Him and be occupied with Him.  It is so different from men around us in the world.  The believer is meant to be devoted to the will of God.
The verses read in John 7 are a challenge to the believer as to whether he is governed by anything else but to practise God's will.  It could be linked with Romans 7:25; "So then I myself with the mind serve God's law".  This is the inward man operating.  The believer's judgment so often is affected by preference or prejudice.  The Spirit will help us to practise God's will as He is the unction.  The believer has a sense of what is right and wrong by having the unction.  How good to repudiate every other influence and to practise His will.  Then we will get a sense of what is right and wrong.  This belongs to believers as having the Holy Spirit, but whether He is allowed to function is another matter.  The desire to practise God's will would allow the unction to operate and give us sensibilities which are of the Spirit.
Substance of word in meeting for ministry
Victoria BC
10th July 1978
{197}
TRUSTWORTHINESS
@Luke 8:15; @Luke 11:34-36; @Luke 24:45-49
I thought we might profitably continue the subject of trustworthiness and how, from another standpoint, we might see the kind of persons the Lord can trust.  There is a sense in which the Lord leaves things to us even if we are not trustworthy.  The fact of the matter is that things get into our hands in any case.  The Lord speaks about the faithful steward (@Luke 12:42), but there were also those who were unfaithful in that chapter.  They were left with his interests, his matters; they took on responsibility for them.  Some were unfaithful, but some were faithful.  So we would desire to be faithful stewards, that is, worthy of the Lord's trust.
In this parable of the sower there were four different kinds of ground.  It brings in the side of our responsibility.  We were looking at John's gospel and the side of sovereignty, God's sovereign operations in new birth.  There would be no one worthy of trust without God's sovereign operations -- that is one side of the matter.  But here it is a matter of the ground, the soil, and that would bring in responsibility.  We are responsible to provide certain soil for the seed.  The seed is the word of God, and God is active in His word.  It is a question of having ears to hear, of providing soil that the word may fall into and produce fruit.  Only one of these four kinds of soil brings forth fruit to perfection.  There is the wayside, which is hardened soil, where the seed is unable to sink in or to penetrate.  It suggests a crust of casualness and carelessness, with no crevice for the seed to get in.  Then there is the rocky ground.  As it says in another version, there is no depth of earth, there is merely superficiality.  There seems to be joy but in time of trial persons fall away.  Tests will come as to whether the word of God has taken root or has not.  This would apply to receiving the word initially, but it would also apply to believers, because God would give us His word continually.  Not only do we provide soil at the beginning of our soul history, but we are meant to provide suitable soil all through our lives as the word of God comes to us continually.  The Lord speaks in chapter 4 about man living by every word of God, @Luke 4:4.  Therefore the believer is to hear the word of God not only initially but continually.
The great test is the kind of soil.  There is that which falls where the thorns are.  We know what cares and riches and pleasures are.  These choke the word so that it is unproductive.  This would also apply to believers as to whether the word is effective when it comes to us.  But then this fourth kind of soil is "an honest and good heart".  It is a matter of being frank and honest, not pretending anything, not being superficial, but being genuine and exercised.  The good ground does not come automatically; it does not come without exercise, and honestly facing what the word conveys.  The absence of pretension, the honest and good heart, is what is needed, keeping the word.  The Lord says in John 14 "He that has my commandments and keeps them …", John 14:21.  We are to keep His commandments, value them, treasure them, and be exercised to answer to them.  This is the honest and good heart, which would provide an answer to the word of God when it comes to us.  "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God" (@Luke 4:4); the believer is meant to live by God's word.  His word, the logos, is what the expression of His mind is.  We would never know the mind of God apart from His word.  The Lord Jesus Himself is the Word.  He is the full expression of what is in the mind of God.  Men would never know what is in God's mind apart from the Logos, and God is constantly expressing what is in His mind.  The great need is for ears to hear what He is saying -- good ground will "bring forth fruit with patience".  It involves exercise and endurance, and overcoming difficulties; not being turned aside or deflected, but bringing forth fruit with patience.  It is meant to be a continual exercise with us that we should provide this good ground, so there would not only be satisfaction for believers, but fruit for God, an answer to what He may express as to His mind at any time.
We often speak as if it were difficult to get God's mind.  In one sense it is, but that is because of difficulties with us.  There is no difficulty on God's side.  God would not deprive us of His mind; He would not from His side make it difficult.  If anyone of us would with an honest and good heart desire to have God's mind about any matter, especially as to His interests, He would tell us what His mind is.  The difficulty is on our side.  We may be governed by preference or prejudice, whereas the honest and good heart has no ulterior motive, no other object, but is genuine and real; the word is received and kept, and it brings forth fruit with patience.  We are all responsible as believers to provide this good ground in our own links with the Father, with the Lord Jesus, and with the Holy Spirit.  The good ground is what we are meant to provide, that the word is received, and there is an answer to it for God's pleasure.
In chapter 11 of this gospel we have the idea of the eye being simple.  The eye being simple is very much like the honest and good heart.  "The lamp of the body is thine eye -- when thine eye is simple, thy whole body also is light; but when it is wicked, thy body also is dark".  It is how the light is received.  The inlet for the light is the eye, and it is needful that the eye be simple; not complicated, not occupied with other things, but simple in the sense of being single as to object; not having many objects, but having one object.  The Lord Jesus is to be the believer's object.  The eye is to be on Him, and on light from Him.  "Thy whole body … is light" is what every one of us would desire to have, "not having any part dark"; not any obscure part somewhere, which will be so if the eye is not simple.  It would involve the exposure of ourselves, the judging of ourselves.  The light would do that so that there is no part dark.  It is a very interesting possibility for every one of us.  Just as the good ground is individual, this also is a matter of our own soul's relations with God.
Joseph in the beginning of Matthew's gospel was uncertain.  He was not sure what to do regarding Mary.  He was unwilling to expose her publicly, and purposed to put her away secretly.  It says in verse 20 of Matthew 1 -- "while he pondered on these things".  We tend to consult with another.  This was a real difficulty, a real problem in Joseph's life, but he did not consult with anyone else.  He pondered.  He did not do anything immediately; he would be praying about it, have his own soul's relations with God about it; he pondered.  It illustrates the honest and good heart, and the simple eye; and while he pondered the angel of God appeared to him.  There is an answer while he pondered.  We might get on the telephone with somebody else, or write to somebody else -- he pondered on these things.  This needs to be developed as a habit with us that when things confront us we know how to ponder.  Nehemiah, in a certain difficulty, consulted with himself, @Nehemiah 5:7.  He would be before God individually first; and then he remonstrated with others afterwards.  The danger is to consult with others and be diverted or deflected, to follow somebody else's idea, whereas the great need is honesty in our own relations with God.  If a person honestly and with a simple eye gets before God, God will not withhold His mind regarding any particular matter.  I am sure this is an important guide.  Of course we have all failed; we all know what it is to consult others and get ourselves involved.  We accepted things we should not have accepted.  We should have learned these lessons in the past, and learn to be individually before God and derive His mind from Him.  He will not withhold His mind from any one who is honest and simple as to his objective.  Now such persons become trustworthy because they have their own link with God, and God can trust them, and they are worthy of His trust because they are persons to whom He can disclose His mind.
In Luke 24 there is the great matter of understanding; "Then he opened their understanding to understand".  This is greatly needed in our day.  The Lord was about to leave the disciples and they were to remain in the city.  This was a current matter existing at that time; and He opened their understanding to understand.  In the day in which we are there are sometimes difficulties.  The disciples thought things were difficult here.  The word perplexity comes in in verse 4.  We all know what it is to be in perplexity, but how good to have our understanding opened to understand.  We need to understand God's mind for us at the present juncture in the testimony.  There is a certain setting in which we are, and it is important to understand it.  It says here "He opened their understanding to understand the scriptures".  The Lord opened their understanding.  It is what He does, and it is not only individual, it is collective too in a sense, to understand the position in which they were at the moment.  The Spirit had not yet come; the Lord was about to leave them, and the promise of the Father was about to come upon them, but they were to remain in the city.  They did that intelligently; they knew exactly where they were at that particular juncture.  And it is good for us to know where we are.  They did not arrive at this by their own efforts or by their own study.  They had failed; they had disbelieved and were in perplexity, but the Lord so acts in His gathering.  His shepherding care, that they were found together, and the Lord leaves them as a company who are committed to Him intelligently.  We need to wait on the Lord that He will open our understanding as to the situation in which we are at this moment.
There is no doubt at all that the disciples loved the Lord.  Even when they failed -- even when Peter failed -- they still had intense love for Christ.  But while we are to have love for the Lord Jesus and be maintained in that, we need also intelligence.  The Lord would have us not only affectionate but intelligent.  We would give hundreds of thousands of believers on this earth credit for loving the Lord, but I wonder how many of us are really intelligent as the Lord would have us be.  May the Lord help us all to understand, to be concerned to provide this good ground, this honest and good heart.  May we be maintained with this simple eye, and may we have our understanding opened.
It is to interested persons that the Lord would grant the opening of their understanding.  If we are not really interested, we will not get our understandings opened, but if we are really set and interested in this direction the Lord will be pleased to open our understanding so that we understand, and are believers here who are marked by genuine affection for Christ and who also have understanding.
Victoria BC
11th July 1978
{202}
SERVING THE LORD
@Romans 12:9-11; @Genesis 22:4-9; @1 Samuel 17:29
This short section in Romans 12 is full of brief, very pointed exhortations.  Paul in his writings does that sometimes.  Towards the end of the first epistle to the Thessalonians, for instance, he gives a number of very brief, pungent exhortations.  Their power lies in their brevity and the point of them.  It would be similar in this little section here: "Let love be unfeigned".  The world around us likes good actors, good actresses.  Some of them receive titles because they do it so well.  This kind of thing is to have no place among believers.  It is innate in every one of us to act a part.  We can be good pretenders.  The more clever and able we are, the more we can put a face on things, but the exhortation is, "Let love be unfeigned; abhorring evil".  We were speaking about the children of God.  Believers who have the Spirit are the children of God, begotten of God, and that nature which they have from God abhors evil.  If the children of God are true to their nature they will abhor evil.  It really involves holiness.  God abhors evil.  "Cleaving to good": that is the positive side.  There is a semi-colon between "abhorring evil" and "cleaving to good".  Each brief important exhortation stands by itself.  "As to brotherly love, kindly affectioned towards one another".  "One another" suggests specially a local setting.  Of course as together here as a company we could think of one another, but it really works out locally.  "Kindly affectioned towards one another: as to honour, each taking the lead in paying it to the other": Mr Darby's note indicates that this is a paraphrase.  Whatever the original was, he paraphrases it to give the sense as to honour, each taking the lead in paying it to the other.  We like honour for ourselves.  When the king spoke about the man whom the king delighted to honour, Haman said to himself, Oh, that must be me, see Esth 6:6.  "As to diligent zealousness, not slothful; in spirit fervent; serving the Lord".
What I want to come to is this matter of serving the Lord.  I noticed this week that the word for 'serving' in verse 11 is serving as bondman.  The note to this verse indicates that there are three different words for 'serving' in this chapter.  The first one in verse 1 is 'priestly service'.  "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service".  This is the action of a priest.  He presents his offering to God.  It is the result of being affected by the compassions of God, the result of the believer's appreciation of the love of God taking the form of compassion in his case; and in response he presents an offering to God of his body -- "a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service".  It is done in a definite, calculated way, not haphazardly or hastily, not done without counting the cost, or without understanding what is involved in it.  He presents his offering, his body as a living sacrifice.  He says, From henceforth my body is going to be a vessel for the service of God.
This is one of the most important steps a believer takes in his life.  His body is offered, never to be recalled.  To one who has presented his body a living sacrifice, things that men might think sacrifice would appear small.  Extricating himself from some kind of yoke, or not prepared to link on with some kind of yoke, men regard as a great sacrifice, but for one who had laid his body on the altar in sacrifice it would be the normal result.  I cannot over-emphasise the importance of every one of our young people taking this step, this action of a priest in offering his body a living sacrifice.
Now the next reference to service, in verse 7 -- "or service, let us occupy ourselves in service" -- is doing the needed service, doing what one sees needs to be done, especially locally.  It is that kind of service, diaconal service.  There is a kind of moral order.  The initial step, the great step, is to present one's body in a priestly act as a living sacrifice, and then one would be on the outlook for any needed service that requires to be done.  Then the third reference to service is bondman service.  There is a need for bondmen, and of course bondwomen.  Bondmen are prepared to have things laid upon them.  It is not so much the idea of being available to do what we see needs to be done but prepared to have a matter or matters laid on us.  We live in a time when there is a lack with men and women of preparedness to take responsibility; or if anyone does take responsibility, he is thinking of the additional results for himself.  Men speak of differentials in the wage structure, and anyone who would take responsibility would want a great differential to make it worthwhile taking on responsibility.  The Lord is looking for persons who are prepared to take on responsibility, to have things laid on them.
Isaac was prepared to have things laid on him.  The will of God is involved in this chapter 22 of Genesis.  The will of God costs something.  It cost Isaac something.  It cost Abraham something.  It says in verse 6, "And Abraham took the wood of the burnt-offering, and laid it on Isaac his son".  Abraham laid the wood on Isaac.  Isaac apparently must have been prepared to take on this wood.  We see it perfectly in our Lord Jesus Christ.  Think of the manhood of Jesus.  Think of the sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ.  Think of the devotion in sacrifice supreme.  Think of the pre­eminence of the Lord Jesus Christ as taking on responsibility, accepting what was laid upon Him.  He came into manhood, into a condition of flesh and blood, that certain things should be laid on Him that could not be laid on any other one.  The great work of redemption was laid on Jesus.  No other one was qualified to have that great work laid upon him, but it was laid upon Jesus.  He took it on, willingly took it on, sustained it all, went through it all at infinite cost to Himself, that the will of God might be secured, that there might be results for the will and the pleasure of God.  Think of the pathway of Jesus here.  This is a beautiful type of the Father and the Son, and the communion between them.  Twice it says "they went both of them together".  Abraham had the fire and the knife in his hand; on Isaac there was the wood.  Isaac was to be the sufferer.  You can see it perfectly set out in the pathway of the Lord Jesus here.  Dear brethren, the Lord is looking for persons who are prepared to be like that, to take responsibility locally or whatever it may be, for the Lord would lay something on every one of us.  Who is available?  That is the great question.  I have no doubt it comes by way of Romans 12 verse 1, persons who have laid their bodies on the altar as a living sacrifice.  It comes by way of persons who are available to do the needed service.  But then bondman service is full committal, full devotion.  We see bondmanship set out perfectly in our Lord Jesus Christ.  It says of Him, "taking a bondman's form", Phil 2:7.  I would say reverently, not only did He come into manhood but He came into a bondman's form.  I believe it refers to the condition into which He came, flesh and blood, a condition in which He could suffer, in which He could pour out His precious blood, in which He could work out this great transaction of redemption.  I would not think of the Lord Jesus exactly in a bondman's form now.  He is in Manhood, but not exactly bondman's form, because Paul goes on to tell us that He has been highly exalted and given a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow (see Phil 2:9, 10), but here He was a bondman.  In the type the wood was laid upon Him.  Who is available in the time in which we are to take on bondman service, our own wills subserving the will of God?  Who is available to have things laid upon him?  Abraham laid the wood on Isaac his son.  Apparently there was no question as to that on the part of Isaac.  He accepted the wood being laid upon him.  Abraham had the fire in his hand, and the knife.
While we think of it typically as the Son here and the Father's activities, we can think of it also as two generations here.  Abraham had the fire and the knife.  He had experienced the fire in his own private life and he had experience of the application of the knife.  He himself had set out these matters.  Those who are older need to be persons who have experienced the testings of fire and have tasted the application of the knife.  Think of Abraham being told to go out from his country and his father's house.  Think of the knife of circumcision being applied, and the fire in Genesis 15.  Abraham experienced all these things.  The wood, the kind of manhood which was Abraham's, is laid upon Isaac.  It is how things continue in the testimony, and Isaac accepted the wood laid on him.  Then it goes on to say that "Abraham built the altar there, and piled the wood; and he bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood".  Where was Isaac's will in all this?  Isaac was submissive to what was laid upon him.  Wherever you may be there is something the Lord would lay upon you.  The fellowship involves accepting some measure of responsibility.  We are in a time when men and women shirk responsibility.  They want the results, the income, but not too much responsibility.  The Lord is looking for persons who are prepared to take responsibility.
Now I want to speak of a few who had things laid upon them.  Isaac is the first.  We see how submissive he was, but he had a sense of being loved.  It says "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, Isaac", v 2.  Isaac accepted what was laid upon him in the consciousness of being loved.  "I beseech you... by the compassions of God" (@Romans 12:2): God's love is behind His compassion.  His compassions are the form His love takes.  We are to be moved by the sense of being loved.  We were speaking of the children of God.  The children of God are those who are loved by God.  "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God", @1 John 3:1.  Isaac accepted what the will of God required in the consciousness of being loved by his father, in the consciousness of communion with his father.
The next one I want to speak about is Moses.  God intended to lay something on Moses, and Moses, as we know, was very reluctant to have the matter laid on him.  Many of us would know something about this.  God called Moses at the bush.  The good will of Him who dwelt in the bush was active, and Moses was called to serve.  A load was laid upon him, and Moses found every reason why he should not be the one who should take on that responsibility.  How patient God was with him!  You might say it was a commendable feature with Moses.  It may have been, up to a point, but he went beyond that point, so much so that God was angry with him.  God was going to lay something on Moses and Moses brought forward excuse and reason why it should not be laid on him, but Jehovah in His grace considered for Moses and gave him a brother to help him with the load.  God said, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?" Exod 4:14.  Even after God was angry with him, God considered for him and gave him a brother to help him to work out what was laid upon him.  I would like to commend this feature of the brother: "as to brotherly love, kindly affectioned towards one another".  I think it would be safe to say that over recent years we have experienced brotherly love and brotherly confidence and mutuality such as maybe we have never experienced before.  Things have been taken on and there has been brotherly support and mutual confidence.  It is the kind of time we have been in, but the fact is that the enemy is set to destroy this.  It is pleasing to God.  It is for our enjoyment and our edification, but the enemy is active somehow to destroy, to sow discord.  He does not care what he uses or what he brings in for his own purpose, but he is intent on destroying and disrupting brotherly links and mutual love and confidence.  We are in a time when we have to be on our guard that we do not let the enemy interrupt the flow of brotherly love and confidence that have been experienced.  God said to Moses, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?"  Two Levites, Moses and Aaron, were in levitical service together.  The enemy does not like that.  He will do all he can to disrupt it.  Jehovah said to Moses, "When he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart", Exod  4:14.  Aaron met him and kissed him.  There was brotherly confidence, brotherly love.  We have had experience of this that has been encouraging and edifying.  A brother was given to Moses to support him and strengthen him and be with him; in fact the two, Moses and Aaron, made one in that sense.
The next one I want to speak about as having matters laid upon him is Joshua.  Jehovah said to him "Be strong and courageous".  Joshua might well have wilted before the task that was put upon him, but Jehovah said to him, "I will not leave thee, neither will I forsake thee.  Be strong and courageous", Josh 1:5, 6.  And Joshua was strong and courageous.  These are features that persons who have matters laid upon them and who accept things that are laid upon them need.  You will need this, dear brother or sister, if you take up any responsibility, you will need to be strong and courageous.  But there is great resource in the Holy Spirit.  It says in Romans 12: "as to diligent zealousness, not slothful; in spirit fervent".  Mr Darby in his translation hardly knows whether to put a capital 'S' or a small 's' for 'spirit' here.  Think of the support of the Spirit in providing strength, in promoting courage, so that what is laid upon us is fulfilled for God's pleasure.  Think of the moral triumph of God in having persons on whom He can lay things, and who accept these things and carry them through for God's pleasure.
The next one I want to speak briefly about is Gideon.  He had a matter laid upon him and he, like Moses, was reluctant to take it on, but the commendable feature with Gideon was that he sought confirmation at every step he took.  Gideon wanted to be sure that God was laying this on him, and that is a good exercise, because some of us have known in the past taking on things that were not laid upon us by the Lord.  Gideon would be preserved from that.  He made sure at every step that what he was doing was what God was laying upon him.  We might even suffer from an obsession; we might think that more is laid upon us than God is laying upon us, and we might be obsessed with a thing.  Gideon was preserved from that because he was assured at every step he took that this was from God, and God was with him in what he was doing.  It is the spirit of dependence, of needing assurance, and God supplied to him assurance at every step.  Every question, every test, that Gideon put to God, He answered.  Gideon put a fleece on the threshing floor.  I know we look at that typically, but I suppose the fleece represented himself because he was thinking of what was confronting him.  When Gideon put the fleece on the threshing floor he said "if dew shall be on the fleece only", Judg 6: 37.  In effect he was saying, Let me be assured of divine favour, of divine support in what I am taking on.  The next time he said "let it... be dry upon the fleece only, and upon all the ground let there be dew".  That means he was prepared to be deprived of any public evidence of God's support in order that others might benefit by his exercise.  Then in consideration for Gideon God Himself gave him a sign.  Appreciating his reluctance to take a step without assurance, God said to him to go into the Midianitish camp.  If he was fearful he could take his servant with him, and he would hear certain things, see Judg 7:9-11.  If we accept responsibility that is laid upon us, God is prepared to assure us that He will give us His support and help at every step we take.
The next is David.  David was challenged as to what he was doing: "I know thy pride and the naughtiness of thy heart", his elder brother said to him.  David's answer was, "Was it not laid upon me?"  Oh, what a good reason David had for being where he was at that moment!  The reason was that it was laid upon him.  David became available because he fed his father's sheep at Bethlehem.  It could be said that locally he was doing the needed service.  He saw what was needed to be done locally and he was available to do it, and he became one who was sent.  Something was laid upon him.  He was found where he was because it was laid upon him.  Let us be ready, dear brethren, to take responsibility, to serve the Lord as bondmen.  May the Lord help us all to be bondmen, prepared to take on what is laid upon us.  There is no doubt the Lord would lay something on every one of us.  May we accept it, for His Name's sake.
Grangemouth
11th November 1978
{209}
PURPOSE OF HEART
@Luke 9:51-53; @Acts 11:22-26; @Daniel 1:8-16; @Psalm 132:13-16; @Ezra 7:10
I desire to speak about purpose of heart, about the need for being definite.  We will get nowhere spiritually without resolve.  The Lord Jesus is the perfect model for us.  We could be well occupied with the purpose of heart that was seen in the Lord Jesus.  He said, "Lo, I come … to do, O God, thy will", Heb 10:7.  It was written of Him in the roll of the book, but there was a moment in time when He came into manhood to fulfil the will of God.  Think of the definiteness of the purpose that marked our Lord Jesus Christ.  There would have been no blessing for us, and God's purpose would not have been secured, if it were not for the Lord Jesus coming into manhood and with purpose of heart pursuing perfectly all that the will of God involved.
So I read the verse in Luke where it says, "He stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem".  Think of the steadfastness of our Lord Jesus Christ.  Think of His perfection in His purpose of heart, His movements never deviating to the right hand or to the left.  All that He was outwardly in His movements was perfect, and all that He was inwardly in His motives and desires was perfect for the eye of God.  Think of His devotion; we may well feed on the purpose of heart of our Lord Jesus Christ and on His devotion to the will of God.  If we feed on this purpose of the Lord Jesus in manhood we will be built up ourselves in desire to be marked by definiteness of purpose of heart.  We will get nowhere without purpose, without decision, and what we often speak of as committal.  Young people, and all of us, need this arriving at a purpose in our lives.  Paul speaks of his purpose; he wrote to Timothy, "But thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching, conduct, purpose", 2 Tim 3:10.  Think of Paul's purpose.  How did Paul maintain his links with the Lord Jesus?  How did he become the devoted servant he was?  By his purpose of heart.
It is seen perfectly and absolutely in our Lord Jesus Christ.  The days of His receiving up were fulfilled, but He moves toward Jerusalem with purpose of heart.  There were those who rejected Him because He moved in this way, but without deviation "he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem".  For Him that meant suffering, the pathway from the mount of transfiguration down to Golgotha, and to the sufferings of the cross.  He was crucified, the object of ridicule, of the animosity of men, with Satan behind them, but He also was the Victim of the sufferings He underwent from the hand of God; but He stedfastly set His face.  It says in John 19:17, "And he went out, bearing his cross"; He, "knowing all things that were coming upon him, went forth", John 18:4.  The steadfastness, the purpose, of our Lord Jesus Christ we do well to dwell upon continually and feed upon so that we too should be marked by increased purpose of heart.
I read about these people in Acts 11.  "They then who had been scattered abroad passed through the country to Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, speaking the word to no one but to Jews alone.  But there were certain of them, Cyprians and Cyrenians, who entering into Antioch spoke to the Greeks also, announcing the glad tidings of the Lord Jesus.  And the Lord's hand was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord.  And the report concerning them reached the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem, and they sent out Barnabas to go through as far as Antioch: who, having arrived and seeing the grace of God, rejoiced, and exhorted all with purpose of heart to abide with the Lord".
These converts in Antioch actually became the assembly in Antioch; they became a remarkable assembly.  How was it formed?  The basis was Barnabas's exhortation, he "exhorted all with purpose of heart to abide with the Lord".  He exhorted them, and then he went away to Tarsus to seek out Saul, and Barnabas and Saul taught for a whole year and assembly conditions were established in Antioch.  It is one of the assemblies which was formed from among the nations.  There is no fault found with it; there seemed to be normal conditions in Antioch.  It was based on this purpose of heart as to which Barnabas exhorted.  It says, "And so it was with them that for a whole year they were gathered together in the assembly and taught a large crowd".  There was constructive teaching in Antioch for a whole year, and there was a positive result in testimony and for the pleasure of God, and the service of God was established there.
Later we find that they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, and the Holy Spirit had His way in that local company.  "The Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul", @Acts 13:2.  You can see, dear brethren, the results of answering to the exhortation with purpose of heart to abide with the Lord.  We know we have deviated, but the word would come to us afresh now that purpose of heart might mark us to abide with the Lord; that the Lord may have His way with us, that we may be subject persons, obedient persons, living by the word of God, ready for instruction.  It is really the good ground, the honest and good heart, of Luke 8:15.  He "exhorted all with purpose of heart to abide with the Lord".  That exhortation would come afresh, I believe, to oneself and to each one of us here, to abide with the Lord, to abide in the area of the truth, to abide under His direction, to be available to Him, to take up responsibilities locally with His interests in view for the promotion of what is for His pleasure and for the pleasure and service of God.  What a privilege we have!  We need to come to decision, to come to committal in purpose of heart.
I have read of three persons in the Old Testament who were marked by this feature, and the first one is Daniel who was a youth.  In modern language we speak of teenagers; that is what Daniel was, but one who had purpose of heart.  We do not need to wait until we are old to arrive at purpose of heart, we can have it when we are young.  Daniel was carried away in the first captivity as we read -- "In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it.  And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, and a part of the vessels of the house of God; and he carried them into the land of Shinar", Dan 1:1, 2.  Daniel was among the youths who were carried away in this captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon.
He was looked upon by Nebuchadnezzar as being a possibility for his system, for Babylon.  He was sent to the university of those days to be trained to promote the idolatrous system of Babylon.  Daniel might have conceded, just accepted the opportunity, but it says that "Daniel purposed in his heart".  He was allocated the daily provision of the king's delicate food and the wine that he drank which, if he had partaken of it, would have fitted him for the Babylonish system; but he purposed in his heart not to pollute himself with the king's delicate food, nor with the wine which he drank, and he requested the prince of the eunuchs that he might not have to pollute himself.  There was no provision made for conscience, but he requested; he was subject and respectful.  How good it would be if our young people came to a certain purpose of heart not to pollute themselves, not to fit into the system of this world.  Daniel not only requested not to be polluted with the king's delicate food and the wine that he drank, but he directed the prince of the eunuchs as to what kind of food he should be fed on; the kind of food he requested was pulse and water.  The king's delicate food was no doubt attractive to the man after the flesh.  It would be well presented; it would be colourful; it would appeal to young people.  Daniel in his purpose of heart rejected it and requested that he should be given pulse.
Now pulse is very unattractive to the natural man; it does not look good; no matter how you presented pulse it would not be all that attractive; but it is basic food.  It was food to build up Daniel in his constitution to be separate from the Babylonish system of things, and to be here in testimony and for the glory and pleasure of God.  Daniel could have been one of the prominent men socially in Babylon, but he was separate from it all.  There was a secret in this; Daniel had a secret in his soul which does not comes out until chapter 6, verse 10, where we are told that Daniel had his windows open toward Jerusalem.  He was in Babylon, but his windows were toward Jerusalem where God's house was.  This first captivity was not a complete captivity; there was something left in Jerusalem.  It was not until a number of years afterwards that Jerusalem was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar when Zedekiah was king; this was the first movement of captivity, so there were still vessels left in Jerusalem, and that is where Daniel's heart was.  It was the appreciation of what was positively there for God that preserved Daniel from being linked on with, and becoming part of, the world's system.
For us it would be light in our souls as to the Lord Jesus Christ in heaven and the Holy Spirit active in an order of things down here for the pleasure of God.  Because of the positive light Daniel had he requested that he would not be polluted with the king's delicate food and the wine that he drank, but that he be fed with pulse and water.  Now what would this pulse be for us today?  The king's delicate food and the wine that he drank is what builds up persons for this world's system, but pulse and water is food for persons who are committed to the will of God.  Pulse is an excellent food, even naturally, but unattractive, as I said.  We have reading material the like of which is not found anywhere else.  I do not mind where you go you will not find reading material such as is available to us in the day in which we are.  We have the Holy Scriptures in an accurate translation; we have ministries which are reliable; I think that is like the pulse.
The Holy Scriptures may be unattractive to us when we are young.  I can remember a time when I knew the Lord as my Saviour but I had little or no desire for the Scriptures.  I could see my father reading his Bible, and I would see him too with books of reliable ministry, and he would be engrossed in enjoying these things, but I did not have that same purpose.  I did not have any taste for the Scriptures until I began to read the Scriptures, and the more I read them the more I desired to read them.  I had no desire to read ministry until I began to read the ministry; the more ministry I read the more I desired to read, not just for memorising it, but I found food, I found what cleansed my thoughts, occupied my mind with what was good and built up the soul in the knowledge of the will of God.  Such reading matter builds up manhood according to God.  I think that is what answers to the pulse and water.  It is simple, not attractive to man after the flesh; you have to acquire a taste for it.  Daniel had this taste; he purposed in his heart.  Let us all purpose in heart to have this taste.  Even as believers we need our taste changed.
When the children of Israel came out of Egypt, after three days in the wilderness they came to Marah and the waters of Marah were bitter.  God showed Moses wood "and he cast it into the waters and the waters became sweet", Exod 15:25.  In the history of the children of Israel the waters changed, but in our experience we change, our taste changes.  What is bitter to the man after the flesh becomes attractive because Moses is shown wood; for us it is really the Lord Jesus Christ here in manhood in wilderness circumstances, here for the will of God.  The appreciation of Him changes our taste, we find the waters can be appropriated, just as Daniel's taste was for this pulse and water.  Dear brethren, we need to arrive at this purpose of heart.  The more we read of this world's literature the less taste we will have for the Scriptures or for ministry that will help us, but the more we commit ourselves to the Scriptures or for ministry that will help us, but the more we commit ourselves to the Scriptures and to ministry that will help us the less taste we will have for what the world offers.  I do not often go into a book shop but I was in one recently to get some books for children and I saw books for every taste.  Satan is able by books to cater for every depraved desire and every taste of the human heart, no matter what it is.  Of course, some of these books are instructive, and some have to be read at school, but many of them are novels, and there are books on all subjects; but there are the Scriptures and there are books that are reliable, books that will build up our souls in the appreciation of the Lord Jesus, and build up our souls in the kind of manhood that is here for the will of God.  The pulse and water are like reading material which we need to commit ourselves to.  You will never get a taste for the Scriptures or ministries that will help you until you begin to appropriate them, then your taste will change.  May we all commit ourselves with purpose of heart to this line of Daniel.  He began young.  There are great opportunities for young people, I believe the Lord specially helps persons who commit themselves when they are young; you cannot begin too young on this line of Daniel.  May we all have this purpose of heart.
Now David in @Psalm 132 says he swore unto Jehovah, and vowed.  You wonder that he was so committed, that his purpose was so definite -- "How he swore unto Jehovah, vowed unto the Mighty One of Jacob -- I will not come into the tent of my house, I will not go up to the couch of my bed; I will not give sleep to mine eyes, slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for Jehovah, habitations for the Mighty One of Jacob...".  You wonder that David could go so far in his purpose of heart to provide what was pleasing to God down here.  He goes on to say, "Behold, we heard of it (that is the ark) at Ephratah, we found it in the fields of the wood".  Think what it was for David's heart when he found it!  He heard of it; it was in what has been described as 'cold storage' with Abinadab up on the hill "in the fields of the wood" (see 1 Sam 7:1); and he found it.  The first ten verses of this psalm give us David's purpose and exercises.  From verse 13 we get God's answer to David's exercises.  The fact is that David's exercises coincided with God's desires.  David's exercises were towards Zion; Zion is called David's city; it is a city that was acquired by David's exercises -- Jehovah says, "For Jehovah hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his dwelling -- This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell", @Psalm 132:13, 14.  Think of David's exercises and purpose of heart being in such a direction that Jehovah can say, This is what I am looking for, this is what I had in mind from the beginning, that a service should be established for Me.  We need to be set, dear brethren, with purpose of heart for what is for God's pleasure, and the service of God.  So from verse 13 it is God's answer to David's prayers, to David's swearing to Jehovah, David's vow, the intenseness of it.  What David was exercised about was exactly what God desired.  Would that be the line of our exercises?  Jehovah says, "This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have desired it".
The fact is, dear brethren, that God is finding at this time in which we are, in spite of all the confusion and the breakdown, what His heart desires, coming about through the exercises of His people to provide something suited to Him.  We have local exercises that conditions should be provided suited for the Lord to come to.  I am not one of those who claim the Lord's presence, that the Lord is with us; my concern is that we should keep providing conditions suitable for the Lord to come.  I am not so much concerned about claiming that the Lord is with us; I am more concerned that we be with the Lord in what His mind is.  He is with them who are with Him; that is a constant, daily, weekly, exercise, to be with Him, and provide conditions suited to Him.  So Jehovah says, "I will abundantly bless her provision; I will satisfy her needy ones with bread; And I will clothe her priests with salvation".  David requests, "Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness" (@Psalm 132:9); God's answer is, "I will clothe her priests with salvation".  We are to be in the enjoyment of salvation.  As a brother said earlier today, there is a fulness about our salvation; there is liberty about it; it leads on to eternal life; that is the fulness of salvation available to us at the present time.  David requests, "and let thy saints shout for joy"; Jehovah says, "and her saints shall shout aloud for joy".
There is excess in the blessing that the Lord bestows on His people, but it comes about through David's exercises, through purpose of heart.  It will come about if we are exercised in this way in our localities; there will be something for the service and pleasure of God.  God will say, This is what I have been looking for; this is what I have pleasure in.  He may have been deprived of it in certain localities for a long time, but now He can say, Here it is for My delight.  It was David's purpose of heart that led to this, and then, you might say, the Lord takes over because He finds conditions suited -- "This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell".  Is it not worthwhile going through exercises to provide something for the divine pleasure?  There is so much around us in confusion, so much that is displeasing to Him.  We often speak of certain things around us as feeling them, but the Lord feels them far more than we do.  We are only just beginning to learn how the Lord feels about certain things.  That is negative; what we need to do is to provide what is positive for His pleasure.
We perhaps do not fully realise what it means to the Lord to have overcomers available in localities down here of whom He can approve.  It means more to Him than we realise.  He would say, This is what I am looking for.  It is not a question of persons so gathered claiming anything; they do not need to claim; it is a question of what the Lord says.  The woman who anointed the Lord's head as recorded at the end of Matthew and the end of Mark was so attracted to the Lord, and loved Him so much, that she brought that ointment and poured it out upon His head.  She would say, 'I just did what I felt like doing'; she would not think there was anything great about it.  Oh how the Lord appreciated what she did!  The Lord said, "What she could she has done", @Mark 14:8.  He said that wheresoever the gospel is preached what she did shall be spoken of.  She never expected such approbation.
I sometimes think that the saints in the assembly in Philadelphia, when they got that letter by the hand of John, would say to themselves, 'We did not expect such approval; we are only a feeble few here; there is more gift in Laodicea'.  We would be greatly encouraged if we could see things as the Lord sees them, and feel things as the Lord feels them.  Some overcomers in a locality gathering together for the Lord's supper means more to Him than we realise; it does indeed.  If we only saw it through His eyes we would be greatly encouraged and built up in His service.  He would say, as it were, "This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell".  It is His own pronouncement, His own approval and approbation.
Now just a word about Ezra, who was in a day of recovery such as we are in.  What impressed me was that Ezra "directed his heart to seek the law of Jehovah and to do it, and to teach in Israel the statutes and the ordinances".  He directed his heart; he set himself in this direction; and this, dear brethren, is needed.  You might say he directed his heart toward the understanding of divine principles; they are needed in the day in which we are.  We need to direct our hearts in this; there needs to be care, leadership, and overseership; all these features are needed in our localities; there will always be need for care.  The more numbers there are, the more these things are needed.  We need a lead in the right direction, and care, and maintenance of divine principles.  We need to direct our hearts, like Ezra, if there are to be conditions pleasing to the Lord.
May we be encouraged to have the purpose of heart of Daniel, and all of us be committed with purpose of heart in spiritual resolve to provide what is pleasing to the Lord, and then let us have regard to divine principles, the maintenance of what is suited to Him in our localities, helping others into it also.  May the Lord help us in these things.
Motueka NZ
10th March 1979
{218}
THE ASSEMBLY FOR CHRIST
@Ephesians 1:15-23; @2 Corinthians 11:1-3
J.R.  I thought we might consider the assembly femininely for Christ.  The assembly femininely is the special answer to the manhood of the Lord Jesus.  In type we can see this before sin came in in Genesis 2; there was the man alone but it was not good that man should be alone and Eve, the woman, ishshah, is built as the counterpart of ish, the man.  We need all to be enlightened as to this great matter.  Paul writes "that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, would give you the spirit of wisdom and revelation", and that statement runs down to the truth as to the assembly, and the conferred glory of the Lord Jesus: "gave him to be head over all things to the assembly".  The assembly shares with Him in His headship: "head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all".  These statements could refer only to the assembly and no other family.  Wonderful as it will be to belong to any other family, none will have this privileged position.  We all need to desire to have the spirit of wisdom and revelation to apprehend the distinctiveness of the assembly as a family, and femininely as an entity for the heart of Christ.
In 2 Corinthians we have the practical side of this.  Paul says "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you"; that is, the Corinthians, that local company.  He has them in mind that they may be an expression locally of this very thing we are speaking about.  It would seem that we would be enlightened by the spirit of wisdom and revelation as to the assembly and the special character of it to be able to work out exercises in view of an expression of that feature femininely in our localities.  What do you say?
A.B.P.  I think we have some little impression of it but we surely need help.
J.R.  We all need help.  I am taking the place of needing help as much as anybody, and in the time in which we are we need to help one another mutually.  We need to be in dependence and be mutual helpers one of another.
A.B.P.  I think that that should be our attitude certainly.  What the Lord may do and say is His matter, and if there is a humble desire to reach the things that are so infinitely precious, I do not think He will disappoint us.
J.R.  I am sure that is right.  Paul had imparted much to these Ephesians but he is concerned that something should happen from the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory.  This spirit of wisdom and revelation is not that which we can arrive at by study; we need to be set in our desires that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may impart it to us.
A.B.P.  Why is the expression "Father of glory" used?
J.R.  "The Father of glory", it seems to me, identifies who Paul has in mind in saying "the God of our Lord Jesus Christ".  The Lord said "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God", John 20:17.  The God of our Lord Jesus Christ is God as the Lord Jesus Christ would know Him fully, as Man.  He, that Person, the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the Father of glory.  It is of course a very glorious appellation.  What do you say about it?
A.B.P.  Does it mean that all glory emanates from Him?  It is not a cold matter but a feeling matter.  I have often been impressed with the fact that when the eternal state is referred to it is "to him who is God and Father" (@1 Corinthians 15:24); the supremacy of God is in mind but along with it the feelings of fatherhood.
J.R.  That is very interesting.  As you quoted this morning, "the Father himself has affection for you, because ye have had affection for me, and have believed that I came out from God", John 16:27.  It is the warmth of the Father's own affection.
C.F.D.  "Would give you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him" is the way Paul is writing to these Ephesians, involving fulness and maturity and, it seems, a knowledge of divine Persons for instance "the Father of glory".  Would you open up for us "in the full knowledge of him".
J.R.  I was impressed with the fulness of it.  "The full knowledge of him" would include the understanding of His purpose.  To Him, according to this chapter, belongs the glory of purpose; "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ; according as he has chosen us in him" (that is in Christ) "before the world's foundation" (vv 3, 4).  The glory of purpose is attributed to this Person who is referred to here as the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory.  The knowledge of Him would include the understanding and appreciation of what God has in His purpose.
C.F.D.  Do you think God intends that the glory and the fulness of this should find its expression in the service of God?
J.R.  I am sure that is right.  It would go back to Him.  He goes on to say, "being enlightened in the eyes of your heart"; how we all ought to desire to be enlightened believers.  All believers are not enlightened, and maybe we are not all enlightened or only partially so.  "The full knowledge of him, being enlightened in the eyes of your heart" is something we can have initiation into.  We have only touched the fringe; there is so much we can become initiated into, wonderful things.  "Enlightened in the eyes of your heart, so that ye should know" runs on to these statements as to the assembly.
L.MacF.  I wondered whether in the type in Genesis 2 we have full growth and maturity.  ls that not intended to help us regarding what God had in His thoughts?  It is not childhood there but full-grown persons.
J.R.  It is a type of the assembly before sin came in, a type of the assembly according to divine purpose.  It is what Jehovah Elohim produces from the rib from Adam.  In Genesis 24 the servant comes in to it and the servant's men; in other types other persons come in, but in Genesis 2 it is wholly divine workmanship.  It is what Jehovah Elohim does by Himself without the introduction of any intermediary service on the part of others.
L.MacF.  So the intelligence of man is there: "This time" (v 23).
J.R.  What shines in that type is not exactly affection; it does not say that Adam loved her; what comes to light is affinity.  It is a vessel wholly in affinity with himself; it must be so because it is wholly of himself.  With Rebecca it says "She became his wife and he loved her" (Gen 24:67); affection comes into that, but it is really affinity in Genesis 2.  Just as it would be here: "gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body"; that includes the idea of affinity, it is what has derived from Himself, and it is "the fulness of him who fills all in all".  What derives from Christ must have affinity with Him.
A.B.P.  His like.
J.R.  Quite so, His counterpart.  His complement: is that an expression that can be used?
A.B.P.  I think so, but I thought "his like" covered it very exactly because it is of Him, therefore it is like Him; but not like Him as having reached that experimentally but as of Him personally.
J.R.  His like because she is derived from Him.  We need to be enlightened in the eyes of our hearts so that we have an appreciation of God's purpose regarding the assembly.  "Head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all" would be the assembly complete from Pentecost until the rapture, the complete thing.  We need to be enlightened in the eyes of our hearts and have an appreciation of what the assembly will be as a complete vessel; it will be perfect, apart from flesh and blood condition in the world to come and in eternity.  It will be perfect, nothing but divine workmanship, wholly spiritual.
A.B.P.  I think that the full knowledge of Him must relate to this same thought because Paul himself says "If any one think he knows anything, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know it", @1 Corinthians 8:2.  It involves the whole assembly and that vessel in her eternal condition.
J.R.  Quite so.  It would have the world to come in mind in that it is a quotation from @Psalm 8: "and has put all things under his feet"; it is the Lord's pre­eminence in the world to come and the assembly alongside of Him having part in His administration.  Is that what you understand?
A.B.P.  And He will be known through them.
C.F.D.  Does this involve "let them have dominion", Gen 1:26?
J.R.  That is just it.  "Head over all things to the assembly" has been likened to a country where there is a king and queen; the queen shares with the king; she has a special relationship to him.  The assembly has a special relationship with Christ and it will be manifestly so in the world to come; only the assembly will have that special relationship.
O.L.L.  We have been speaking about His like; it says "bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh", Gen 2:23.
J.R.  That is right, derived from Him -- bone of His bones.  The tribes came to David and said "Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh", 2 Sam 5:1.  That is not the same idea; we are thy bone and flesh really means we are thy kith and kin, we are the same kindred.  But of His flesh and of His bones means that they have derived from Him; there is something nearer even than what is kindred.  We read "For no one has ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as also the Christ the assembly; for we are members of his body; we are of his flesh, and of his bones", @Ephesians 5:29.  His body has derived from Him, His body expresses Him.
A.B.P.  So when we have our glorified bodies they will be substantial.
J.R.  I am sure that is so.  I like to think that we are in for some delightful surprises.  We have little idea of what is ahead of us.  There is very little said of our body of glory except that it is like His body of glory.  Is that not blessed?  Will it not be delightful to have bodies of glory like His body?
A.B.P.  It is getting nearer every day.
J.R.  That is right.  We have had some surprises in the testimony that were not very delightful but we are going to have some delightful surprises surpassing our greatest expectations.
C.S.E.  The apostle prayed that they would get the spirit of wisdom and revelation, and he says in verse 15: "having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is in you, and the love which ye have towards all the saints".  Would we on our part seek to provide the conditions, and if they are there, would that make way for God to come in and give us the spirit of wisdom?
J.R.  I think that is right.  So they were ready for this because of features that Paul could take account of.  As you say, "the faith in the Lord Jesus which is in you, and the love which ye have towards all the saints would show there was reality in their faith and in their love.  Paul could take account of this and so pray for them according to this high level.  He might not pray for all the saints according to this high level; maybe for the Corinthians he would pray something a little different, what was required in that locality.
C.S.E.  It would seem as if there was an enlarged measure in their hearts at Ephesus.  Do you think where that is so in any locality it provides the basis on which God can act?
J.R.  Quite so.  So we would seek to have these qualifications that Paul refers to in verse 15 and help one another to have them.  Regarding "which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all", I understand that every family will express some feature of Christ but the assembly will be His fulness; every feature of Him as Man will be appreciated and expressed in the assembly.  Is that what you understand?
A.B.P.  In the economy; we cannot go beyond that.  It is a marvellous thing.  It says of Samuel that none of his words fell to the ground, see 1 Sam 3:19.  There was capacity in Israel somewhere to receive everything he said.  But with the assembly there is capacity to receive all that has come out in manifestation.  I think it is a very wonderful thing, and it relates to what has been said, that the approach is equal to the declaration.
J.R.  Quite so.  The holy city is said to have the glory of God: "having the glory of God", Rev 21:10.  Then it goes on to speak about "her shining": there is something distinctive about that.  As "having the glory of God" she is a vessel which has absorbed knowledge of God and expresses it.  That shines for the benefit of the universe; the assembly will be the heavenly metropolis of the universe in the world to come, and we understand that the assembly will be the only feminine vessel in eternity.  There will be Jerusalem which can be viewed as the earthly bride, the earthly metropolis, but that will not go into eternity I understand, but the assembly will be eternally the feminine answer to the heart of Christ.
C.F.D.  Therefore the marital thought is reserved exclusively for Christ and the assembly.
J.R.  That is what I understand.  It is good to converse about these things and to get an impression and an appreciation of them.  In 2 Corinthians Paul says "I have espoused you"; he makes known in this verse what has been the secret and what governed him in his labours for the Corinthians from the very beginning: "I have espoused you unto one man".  When he went to Corinth there were not very promising conditions but he spent eighteen months there teaching the word of God.  What was his objective?  To espouse them to one Man.  In these two letters, what was his objective?  To espouse them to one Man.  Now we may ask ourselves, in all our activities in our localities what is our objective?  Is it what is feminine for the heart of Christ?  Does that govern us?  If we do not have the light of it, it will not govern us.  But we may have the light of it and yet it may not govern us.  But as we have the light of it and have it governing us there would be something effected in view of what is feminine locally.
A.B.P.  In this verse 2 I do not suppose you can find any difference between that service and the service of the Spirit; that is what the Spirit is labouring for.
J.R.  That is right.  The servant in Genesis 24 espoused Rebecca for Isaac; he was sent out for that purpose.  In all his activity he did not approach her with any selfish motive; she was to be all for Isaac.  And then he had men with him; they are not mentioned until halfway through the chapter, but you find the servant and his men.  There is what the Spirit typically in the servant is after and there were men of the same mind.  Paul was one of them, and we could fill out that service in our own locality, do you think?
A.B.P.  That is very fine, because service, while it was set out perfectly in Jesus, is set out perfectly in the Spirit too.
J.R.  Quite so.  We can take on that same kind of service according to our measure.  Let us have this objective.  Hegai in the book of Esther was a chamberlain, a eunuch, and could be entrusted as keeper of the women; he would not be thinking of his own selfish satisfaction but he served the king.  He really espoused Esther in view of the king's pleasure, typically in view of the pleasure of Christ.
A.B.P.  So that Paul really was a eunuch.
J.R.  He certainly was.  The Lord speaks about that: "there are eunuchs who have made eunuchs of themselves for the sake of the kingdom of the heavens" , @Matthew 19:12.  This principle can be taken on by any one of us, not to be in any service or anything for our own satisfaction for our own ends but for what is for the heart of Christ.
A.S.H.  Why do you think Paul begins this chapter with "bear with me in a little folly"?  Then he goes on to so much greater things.
J.R.  He almost rebukes himself for speaking of himself in these chapters.  He is reaching the end of his second epistle and he is so concerned to gain their confidence.  He espoused them to one Man, but was he appreciated in Corinth?  No, he was not.
A.B.P.  I am glad you are speaking of it because that scripture was so misused to justify a lot of nonsense that was carried on in the meetings.
J.R.  That is very important.  That was not on the line of espousing you as a chaste virgin to Christ; it was very far from it; it had a corrupting influence.  Verse 3 would apply: "lest by any means, as the serpent deceived Eve by his craft, so your thoughts should be corrupted from simplicity as to the Christ".
G.D.W.  Would this tendency to discount what Paul said cause him to use this great skill?  He says "Would that ye would bear with me in a little folly", as if he would make himself the lowest among his brethren and win them and espouse them to Christ.
J.R.  That is right.  The question with the Corinthians was, were they willing to be espoused.  That was his objective; "I have espoused you"; but were they willing to be espoused?  Rebecca was willing to be espoused, and Esther was willing to be espoused; they were subject.  In fact Esther required nothing but what Hegai provided; she was entirely subject and obedient.  Now if there are persons in my locality who have this objective and are labouring to secure this result, I need to appreciate them and appreciate their objective and be subject.
G.D.W.  Paul is communicating with the Corinthians; we have affinities, but then there is the thought of communion.  It says of David that he communed with Abigail, see 1 Sam 25:33.  And there is our side of that too.
J.R.  I am glad you refer to that because the servants whom David sent to commune with Abigail were really espousing Abigail for David; they were representing David and his desires and therefore they were espousing her and she was willing to be espoused.  She was humble; she said "let thy handmaid be a bondwoman to wash the feet of the servants of my lord", v 41.  That is the kind of spirit of persons who are willing to be espoused.  The question is, Are we willing to be espoused?  Are we willing to be led along this way that there may be a feminine answer for the heart of Christ?
G.D.W.  Is not that communion a two-way matter?  Christ has done everything to communicate with us from His side; now the question is our response.
J.R.  That is right.
A.Macd.  You were speaking of the labours of those seeking to espouse to Christ; that involved Paul's prayers as well as platform service.
J.R.  That is very important.  It involved his tears too; he tells them in the second epistle that he wrote the first epistle with many tears, see chap 2:4.  They were rebellious; they were not willing to be espoused; they were a little like Zipporah.  Moses' father-in-law really espoused Zipporah to Moses.  It was he who gave Zipporah to Moses, and you find later that Moses' father-in-law protected Zipporah and her sons in view of bringing them again to Moses after the people came out of Egypt, see Exod 18:2-5.  This protecting, espousing service is important for some­ one or ones to take on in every locality.  But then we all need to be subject and appreciate that such service is taken on on our behalf.
C.F.D.  What you are raising is certainly a very challenging and yet a wonderful idea.  "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ".  Ephesians 5 shows that He actually presents the assembly to Himself.  The servant brought Rebecca to Isaac but Isaac really presented her to himself.  But Paul speaks here about presenting them a chaste virgin to Christ.  Would you help us as to the fine meaning involved in this?
J.R.  I thought that the servant presented Rebecca to Isaac; the messengers David sent to commune with Abigail would present Abigail.  The servant took ten camels: ten camels went out, ten camels must have come back; the servant was on one of these camels; and the men (we are not told how many there were).  Then coming back there was the servant and his men but there was Rebecca and her maids.  The ten camels might not all have had occupants when they went out but I think they would have when they went back.  Isaac lifted up his eyes and saw camels coming, and then the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.  He would go over the whole commission he had taken on and how pleased he would be with the result.  I thought that the servant really presented Rebecca to Isaac.  "And she had said to the servant, Who is the man that is walking in the fields to meet us?  And the servant said, that is my master!  Then she took the veil, and covered herself.  And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.  And Isaac led her into his mother Sarah's tent; and he took Rebecca, and she became his wife, and he loved her", Gen 24:65-67.
C.F.D.  Is it your thought that the service of the Spirit of God, and of those under the hand of the Spirit, brings the persons and presents them in the sense that they are in immediate proximity to Christ?
J.R.  The espousers have in mind to make the persons presentable.  Rebecca was presentable as the result of the servant's activities.  "I have espoused you":that is how Paul regarded these Corinthians; he regarded them as espoused to Christ but his labours were that he might present them, that there might be the practical answer to what he had in his mind as to espousal.
A.B.P.  I think you have touched on something that is very important -- to distinguish between the leadership of the Spirit and the leadership of Christ.  The leadership of the Spirit brings us into a spiritual area, but the leadership of Christ takes on in the assembly.  So Isaac led Rebecca into his mother's tent:that was his part of leadership.  The leadership of the Spirit -- "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God" (@Romans 8:14) -- related to the wilderness.
J.R.  Very good.
O.L.L.  The Spirit will be with us for ever, even when we are with the Lord.
G.D.W.  This matter has to be worked out in our localities, and is that not why you referred to Corinth?
J.R.  That is right.  Of course we have to bear in mind that they were a company who could be addressed as the assembly of God.  They were all together as believers; that was before the breakdown came in.  Now in the day in which we are we cannot take the place of being the assembly of God in a place because that must include every believer in the place.  We could accept the obligation to bring every believer to this, but we can work only with those who are available.
G.D.W.  It is really a question of acting in the light of the assembly.
J.R.  Exactly.  We are somewhat limited to those who are available.  Not that you would not have in mind other believers; if you know other believers in a place you would endeavour to enlighten them as to the assembly and see whether they are espousable and presentable, but with those who are available is largely where the labours take place.
T.E.D.  Rebecca said "I will go"; is that not the needed exercise on the part of individual believers in view of being presentable?
J.R.  That is very good; she was willing to be espoused.  The Corinthians were really unwilling to be espoused and did not appreciate the one who had espoused them, or his labours.  It tends to be in our localities that those who have this high objective are not appreciated as they ought to be.  We have exhortations in the Scriptures, like @1 Thessalonians 5:12: "But we beg you, brethren, to know those who labour among you, and take the lead among you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to regard them exceedingly in love on account of their work".  That is in principle this espousal service.  And in 1 Timothy 5:17; "Let the elders who take the lead among the saints well be esteemed worthy of double honour, specially those labouring in word and teaching"; that is, persons who undertake this kind of service are not to be resented.  The Lord will lose if such service is resented.  We need to be subject to admonition and all that kind of thing on the part of persons who have this objective that Paul had regarding the Corinthians.
G.D.P.  The brother giving thanks this morning said, In the world there are lords many and gods many but we come to this one Man.
J.R.  That is right, "I have espoused you unto one man".  Then let one Man and what is for Him be our objective in all we do.  That ought to be the objective and motive in all local exercises, what is feminine for the heart of Christ.
A.Macd.  Would the one Man link with "simplicity as to the Christ"?  Sometimes we get our eyes off Christ and things become complicated.
J.R.  That is very true.  We have known by experience how complicated and involved things became because we got our eye on other men.
O.L.L.  At one time Paul told the Corinthians that he did not lie; he said "The God and Father of the Lord Jesus knows -- he who is blessed for ever -- that I do not lie" (@2 Corinthians 11:31), because they did not believe what he was saying.
J.R.  That is right.  In chapter 1 of this epistle Paul has to defend himself because they were accusing him of ulterior motives in his actions.  All these kinds of things are attributed very often to persons who have this high standard locally of what is for the heart of Christ.  We need to guard against this and accept admonition, whatever it may be, by persons who have as objective an answer to the heart of Christ locally.
C.C.G.  Do you think the Song of Songs would have a bearing on this, to have the one Man before us so that we can distinguish His beauty from head to foot?
J.R.  That is good because that is a love setting, a matter of affection.  She was able to say "I am my beloved's, And his desire is toward me", chap 7:10.  She is being espoused and she is presentable.  The keepers of the city were rough on her at one point.  Unless we have this pure objective, we can be rough on the brethren unnecessarily.  This objective would preserve us from being unduly rough on the brethren.  There would be a tenderness with service of this kind because the Lord Himself is tender; and patience too, and yet we need to maintain that high standard.
C.S.E.  The apostle said "I am jealous as to you with a jealousy which is of God".  Do you think this kind of motive needs support and encouragement in order to help the saints that this pure line of things for Christ might be developed more?
J.R.  Jealousy is the form love takes in certain circumstances.
B.T.  Would the eyes of our heart help us in relation to keeping current with the one Man?  Head knowledge and other things have come in in relation to the breakdown, bringing in other men.  That is what has happened in professing Christendom.
J.R.  That is right.  It was a departure from this kind of outlook that brought in the breakdown.  Clericalism developed, and that makes much of the cleric.  What is needed is service undertaken locally with a view to the satisfaction of the heart of Christ.  The feminine side of the assembly is an entity; it is not exactly so many persons.  Sonship involves so many persons, brethren of Christ so many persons, but the assembly as a chaste virgin involves an entity, something in oneness and unity, one result for Christ.
A.B.P.  What about motherhood in relation to this?
J.R.  I was thinking of Ruth and the motherhood of Naomi; she really espoused Ruth for Boaz.  In chapter 3 she instructs Ruth and Ruth was subject; she was espousable and also presentable.
A.B.P.  She did exactly what Naomi told her: she washed herself, she anointed herself, she put on raiment -- which was not a gleaner's garment I am sure -- and went and lay down at the feet of Boaz.  I was thinking as you were speaking that that is a wonderful example of espousing.
J.R.  It is indeed.  You get many examples of it in the Old Testament, but what is needed is this kind of thing in each locality, somebody representing what the Lord is seeking and all of us subject to that element.
B.T.  God said "I remember for thee... the love of thine espousals" (Jer 2:2) as if it is a delightful matter to Him.
J.R.  That is right.  There is a freshness about espousal; it is full of promise; it opens up a new vista.
P.L.D.  Does the overcomer in Philadelphia fit with this and with what you said yesterday about Paul saying "My God"?  All this is written upon one person; "the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven, from my God", Rev 3:12.  Would not this link with the way Paul desires to set Christ forward?  And then Christ gives God all the glory for it.
J.R.  That is good, because I think we are in the day of the overcomers of Philadelphia.  Looking back we have a certain advantage over those who have gone before us.  In certain years the claiming to be Philadelphia was repudiated and rightly so, but looking back on all that has happened since I think we can recognise a Philadelphian phase of things in the history of the testimony, when there was a ministry in power and freshness taken account of universally.  Mr Darby's ministry was a known matter, his Collected Writings are known in Christendom.  There was a power and life that made an impact on Christendom, and that lasted for one hundred and twenty years.  Now publicly that has passed and we are into a Laodicean order of things.
A.B.P.  And we realise that we thought we were in it but we really were not.  There was the expression of it but many of us were really not in it.
J.R.  That is right.  But we can be overcomers.  I often used to wonder why there were overcomers in Philadelphia.
A.B.P.  Are we not overcomers in Laodicea rather?
J.R.  Yes, we are overcomers in Laodicea.  If we are anything at all we are overcomers in Laodicea.
A.B.P.  The only way for us to get into any Philadelphian character is to be overcomers in Laodicea.
J.R.  That is the truth I am sure.
C.F.D.  The last four assemblies addressed, as we have been helped to see, run concurrently right on to the end, do they not?  Therefore the feature of the overcomer seems to be the key at the present time as to whether we really fit into that pattern.
J.R.  Yes, we have been taught, and I agree with it, that these four go on to the end.  But in the historical setting Sardis came out of Thyatira, Philadelphia came out of Sardis, and Laodicea follows on that.
C.F.D.  Quite so.  I think what you have said as to the overcomer is something extremely important in our own day because the expression of these things is to be found somewhere.  Do you not think that it is in the overcomer that the expression of it is seen and therefore the challenge to every one of us here today is, Are we truly overcomers in these conditions?  Because we are here it does not mean necessarily that we are.
J.R.  So overcomers locally at the present time are the answer to "where two or three are gathered together unto my name", @Matthew 18:20.  They are two or three overcomers, and I believe that there have been overcomers right through the different phases.  The overcomers in Smyrna lost their lives in martyrdom; I am sure there were overcomers in Pergamos and in Thyatira, and so on right through, there were overcomers in Sardis; and if Philadelphia exists at all today it is in overcomers.
G.D.W.  "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking" (Rev 3:20): is that not a great appeal for us to open from our side?  The overcomer is like 2 Timothy 2: "if therefore one" (v 21); so it comes down to what is individual.
J.R.  That is right.  It comes into John 14 as well: "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me" (v 21); that is the overcomer.  It comes down to two in Matthew 18; it comes down to one in John 14.
G.D.W.  Mr Raven stressed the importance of what is individual so that we would understand how to act in the light of the assembly.
J.R.  Paul says here "I fear".  He had espoused them; that was what took place in his mind.  I suppose the gospel really espouses us.  In the first epistle Paul gives a list of sinful persons and he says "these things were some of you", chap 6:11.  Paul had espoused them by means of the glad tidings: "but ye have been washed, but ye have been sanctified, but ye have been justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God".  We have been espoused by the glad tidings, but do we go far enough as to what is for the heart of Christ?
A.B.P.  I was wondering about that because the servant saw in Rebecca something that he had not effectuated.  He could adorn it, he could bring the garments from the heavenly sphere which would make her suitable for it in relation to the espousal, but there must be something there; she said "I will go".
J.R.  Quite so.  She lived by the local well before the servant espoused her.
A.B.P.  That was not her first visit there.
J.R.  The well is a local idea; it is what is available to us locally in the Spirit in freshness and life, and she lived by that, she was subject in that area.
A.B.P.  In contrast to a river, for instance.
J.R.  Exactly.  You see it in the Old Testament, Beer-sheba for instance: Isaac's servants dug a well "and he called it Shebah", Gen 26:33.  Later there was the city of Beer-sheba; that is, the city was built around the well, the well being a local idea where refreshment and life were maintained.
T.E.D.  There is a reference in verse 3 to "your thoughts".  If I am living by the well will not my thoughts be protected?  Our mind is an area we need to protect, do we not?
J.R.  Very much so; control of our minds is very important.  Our minds come into the epistle to the Romans: "I myself with the mind serve God's law", chap 7:25.  The mind is a faculty the believer has which is to be used for his protection and his progress.  The Spirit will help us to control our minds.  Is that what you understand?
T.E.D.  I was thinking of that.  We need to allow the Spirit scope.
J.R.  That is right.  Paul says "the arms of our warfare are not fleshly, but powerful according to God to the overthrow of strongholds; overthrowing reasonings" -- we are often subject to reasonings -- "and every high thing that lifts itself up against the knowledge of God, and leading captive every thought into the obedience of the Christ", @2 Corinthians 10:4, 5.  That is part of his espousal service.
C.F.D.  All that stands over against simplicity as to the Christ.  When our minds become entangled and complicated, we lose the touch of the simplicity as to the Christ.  The Spirit of God would help us to get back to that.
J.R.  I am sure that is right.  "Simplicity as to the Christ" reminds you of the simple eye: "when thine eye is simple, thy whole body also is light", @Luke 11:34.  It is simplicity and singleness of purpose and outlook.
A.B.P.  It seems that in marriages that take place amongst us these days there is not always the simplicity as to the Christ.  I mean the wedding gowns and all the dress-up that is brought in is giving real concern.  You can understand a certain amount of it and have sympathy with it, but when it is carried to extreme it gets beyond the simplicity of the Christ.  John the baptist could say "He that has the bride is the bridegroom", John 3:29.  What could be simpler or more profound than that?
J.R.  Certainly we should avoid being as like the world as possible; which is a tendency.  Young people, of course, we can be patient with but, as you say, it can be overdone.
A.B.P.  I have noticed that it gets a little bit more extreme at each wedding that takes place.  This kind of thing is one of the indications of what we have to be guarded against if we are going to go on in the simplicity as to the Christ.
J.R.  The question would be if such an exercise as yours would be heeded.  Some might think you are old-fashioned, you do not understand.  You are speaking in the light of espousing the local company for Christ, a chaste virgin to Christ; that is your exercise and such an exercise should be respected and persons should be subject to it.  They were saying all kinds of things about Paul; I do not know whether they were saying he was old-fashioned but, in any case, they were saying all kinds of things about him in his absence.  They would not say it to his face, of course; they would not say to your face that you are old-fashioned and you do not understand, and so on.  I know the kind of things that could be said.  But that is an example of this kind of exercise not being heeded, persons not prepared to be espoused.  Do you follow?
A.B.P.  I do.  I hope I am not extreme in what I am saying but I really feel that there is a tendency to get away from the simplicity as to the Christ.
J.R.  That is right.  You have given us a practical example I am sure.
A.B.P.  I am sorry to bring this in.
J.R.  We are on practical matters and that is an example of it; if only such exercises were heeded and show kept within certain limits.  Not that it should not be a happy occasion; some people say it is the happiest day in a man's life.  I do not believe that; it ought to be the beginning of many happy days, and for the bride too.
New York
18th November 1979
Key to initials
C.F.Dadd, Plainfield; P.L.Druckenmiller, Plainfield; T.E.Druckenmiller, Plainfield; C.S.Elliott, New York; C.C.Greenidge, Plainfield; A.S.Hinkson, New York; O.L.Linton, New York; A.Macdonald, New York; L.MacFarlane, New York; A.B.Parker, New York; G.D.Pfingst, Plainfield; J.Renton, Edinburgh; B.Taylor, New York; G.D.Ware, New York.
{235}
"AGREEABLE TO HIM"
@2 Corinthians 5:4-9
An occasion like this has its own distinction in that it is not of our arrangement.  We are here, as our brother said in prayer, because the Lord has taken one from our midst, and it is because of the Lord's own action that we are found gathered here, and we would expect the Lord to speak to us as gathered.  The Lord has something in mind for us in what He has done.  He has something in mind for our sister whom He has taken.  Hers is a very blessed portion, to be with Christ, which Paul says "is very much better", Phil 1:23.  I remember a brother in this city once saying that we tend to think that being with the Lord is the next best thing to being here, but it is not so, it is "very much better".  For our sister, her life of responsibility and service and testimony is over she is with her Lord and Saviour, put to sleep through Jesus.  Therefore if the Lord would speak, it would be in view of the benefit to us who are left, that the rest of our time might be filled up so as to be "agreeable to him".
I have read this portion which speaks about "our house which is from heaven".  We are within a tabernacle now -- a mortal tabernacle.  It is a provisional condition.  But what is in view is a house from heaven, that is what is in view for every one of us as believers.  So the apostle says, "For indeed we who are in the tabernacle groan, being burdened". Every one of us here would be a witness to the fact that we are mortal.  The groaning refers to the mortal condition, the condition of suffering and being liable to death. But he goes on to say, "yet we do not wish to be unclothed, but clothed, that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life".  When the Lord comes and raises those who are fallen asleep, what is mortal will be "swallowed up by life".  When He comes for those of us who may be alive and remain, what is mortal will be "swallowed up by life"; not simply overcome, but "swallowed up by life".  Paul writes in the previous epistle, "Death has been swallowed up in victory", @1 Corinthians 15:54. Being swallowed up is a very full idea.  That is the prospect before every one of us.  "Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God" -- God has wrought us in view of finality, a final condition, no longer a mortal condition, but a condition "swallowed up by life", a condition that will go into eternity.  How wonderful that is!
"Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God, who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit. Therefore we are always confident, and know that while present in the body we are absent from the Lord".  That is the condition in which we are, "present in the body" and "absent from the Lord". Our sister is "absent from the body and present with the Lord", but the time of our being "absent from the Lord", "present in the body", is the time when we need to be committed.  For our sister, her time of committal, of devotion, of responsibility and service of a testimonial character is over, over for ever.  Our time of testimony is a comparatively short time, hence the need to be faithful.
I was thinking of Boaz in the book of Ruth.  In chapter 3 he is engaged in the winnowing process, and he is viewed as having laid himself down at the end of the heap of corn; the threshing and the winnowing have taken place.  The winnowing is a refining process; the threshing is a violent, severe process, a process of beating; but the winnowing is more gentle; it is a wind process, blowing the chaff from off the wheat.  We would all experience something of the threshing process; our sister has been an example of that.  There was a time when she went through very severe suffering, but finally you could see the winnowing process, something more gentle taking place, in view of refinement, in view of a finished product, a finished article.  That is what we could see with our sister, and that is what the Lord has in mind for every one of us.  In chapter 3 of the Book of Ruth, Boaz is winnowing, and then he lays himself down "at the end of the heap of corn", @Ruth 3:7.  Now the corn has been secured; it has gone through the winnowing process; there is no more service to be rendered to the corn in that setting.  The corn represents the finished product.  I thought it might represent those who sleep in Jesus.  In "the heap of corn" life is latent; there meantime it is latent.  He laid himself down "at the end of the heap of corn".
We tend to forget the Lord's satisfaction in taking His own to be with Himself.  We think of the blessedness for the persons who are taken; we may be reluctant to think that theirs is a blessed portion, but it is nevertheless.  But then, think of the satisfaction that the Lord has in having myriads with Himself.  The larger part of the assembly He has with Himself secure, the finishing process having taken place, and there for His own pleasure, soon to be manifested.  It says that Boaz's "heart was merry" as he laid himself down at the end of the heap of corn; it is his own satisfaction in that process having taken place.  But then Ruth comes on the scene.  Ruth came into that threshing-floor.  She laid herself down at the feet of Boaz.  She said, "Spread thy skirt" (or thy 'wing') "over thy handmaid".  Boaz was active in relation to Ruth.  In a sense, the Lord's service regarding His own who are with Himself is complete, just as Boaz' activity with the heap of corn was complete, but his activities are in view of Ruth.  Ruth would represent ourselves here, the current position of those of us who are "present in the body" and "absent from the Lord"; the Lord is active towards each one of us.
As we read the remaining part of the third chapter of the Book of Ruth and the fourth chapter, we can see how Boaz is active in relation to final relationships known between Ruth and himself, and that is what the Lord is after in this time in which we are.  While we are "present in the body" and "absent from the Lord" it is the time of the Lord's service, and the Spirit's service, towards every one of us in view of each one of us being a finished article for the Lord's pleasure eternally.  You can think of that heap of corn in relation to the personnel of the assembly secured; you can think of that heap as representing those who sleep from Abel onwards, myriads, millions, all that is now secured for the Lord's own satisfaction, soon to be "swallowed up by life", life in manifestation for the pleasure and glory of God and for the heart of Christ.
So Paul says, "while present in the body we are absent from the Lord".  The very fact that we are "absent from the Lord" means that it is to be a time that calls for faithfulness, for testimony, for devoted committal; that is the time that we are in as "present in the body".  The body is what expresses what is inward.  We were hearing last night about our being, our spirits, but the body is needed for expression.  Those who have been taken to be with the Lord are in a sense unclothed; there is not the same ability to express what there is.  That is going to come.  What an expression it will be when it does come!  What is mortal will be "swallowed up by life"!  But meantime we are present in the body, and there is meant to be an expression of something for the pleasure of God, and for the heart of Christ.  "Absent from the Lord" is a time for fidelity, a time for testimony, and that is expressed in our bodies.  "We walk by faith, not by sight"; that is because we are absent from the Lord.  Soon we will see Him, we will actually see the Lord Jesus face to face; the time of faith will be over.  Paul says that it is preferable "to be absent from the body and present with the Lord", but soon, dear brethren, we will be present in the body and present with the Lord.  We are going to have bodies of glory to express what God has wrought in each one of us.  He "has wrought us for this very thing".  There is going to be the full expression in bodies of glory like that of our Lord Jesus Christ.  Think of "swallowed up by life"; how glorious, how blessed and how triumphant these thoughts are!  They are to energise us and strengthen us in our time of fidelity while "absent from the Lord".
Therefore Paul says, "Wherefore also we are zealous".  There is a need, dear brethren, for being zealous, not half-hearted, not just nominal.  "Wherefore also we are zealous, whether present or absent", that is, whether we view ourselves as present in the body or absent from the Lord, which is the time we are in, "we are zealous... to be agreeable to him".  May the Lord help us all.  Our sister has had her active part in this city in testimony, in hospitality, in deaconess service; she has fulfilled her part.  There is a need to fill the ranks in this city in which we are.  May we all be more zealous "to be agreeable to him", for His Name's sake.
Edinburgh
23rd January 1980
at a burial meeting
{239}
"HIS OWN" AND "HER OWN"
@Ephesians 5:28-32
I desire to say a few words about the uniqueness of the marriage bond.  There is nothing else like it in relationships.  I refer to the latter part of verse 2 in @1 Corinthians 7 -- "Let each have his own wife, and each woman have her own husband" -- his own and her own.  A brother may have a house; he may have many possessions; but there is nothing as close as his wife, his own wife.  No matter what possessions a sister may have, there is something closer than anything else -- her own husband.  His own and her own is a closer relationship than father and son, or mother and daughter.  The marriage bond is the most intimate of all relationships.  There is a certain sanctity about the marriage bond; it is a divine institution.  We need to keep this level of things before us, not only our young brother and sister who are married today, but all of us.  We need to be reminded of the unique intimacy of the marriage bond.  Our brother spoke about sharing, sharing thoughts, sharing impressions; that ought to be true with husband and wife; his own wife, her own husband.  A man may say he has his own house, but it is not his own in the same sense that his wife is his own.
It is seen, as this scripture in Ephesians presents it to us, in Christ and the assembly: "So ought men also to love their own wives as their own bodies".  This scripture is often referred to in an occasion like this, and often stress is laid on subjection on the part of the wife, which is all right in its place, but actually there is more said about the husband than about the wife.  There is more said about the husband because the husband is to present initiative in love.  This is needed because as husbands we are all selfish.  We would have to accept that men are basically selfish, hence the need for these injunctions that the husband should love his own wife.  "So ought men also to love their own wives as their own bodies".  What could be closer than husband and wife in this setting, in the sanctity and the intimacy of the marriage bond?  This bond has been entered into today by our young brother and sister.  The husband needs to have this attitude of showing initiative in love, which will be responded to on the part of his own wife.  Initiative in love is to be maintained.  How beautifully it is set forth, how perfectly, in our Lord Jesus Christ!  Has there not been demonstration of initiative in love in Christ which has begotten a response with every one of us?  That is to be the divine standard in relation to which our marriages are to work out for the glory and pleasure of God, and for the furtherance of the testimony.
"So ought men also to love their own wives as their own bodies; he that loves his own wife loves himself".  We need to let this lay hold of us.  "For no one has ever hated his own flesh" -- that is true naturally -- "but nourishes it and cherishes it" -- that is true too, but it goes on, "even as also the Christ the assembly".  The assembly is the counterpart of Christ.  We often speak about it, delight to speak about it, delight in the light that through mercy has been vouchsafed to us because of the faithfulness of those who have gone before us; but it needs to be maintained in our marriages and in our households, "for we are members of his body; we are of his flesh, and of his bones".  We speak about the truth of union; this is the truth of union -- "he that loves his own wife loves himself".  That is how Christ loves the assembly.  Assembly persons think as Christ does.  These are assembly features, taken on by assembly persons.
It would be a poor thing if we have the light of the assembly and do not fill it out in our daily lives down here.  This is the divine standard for all of us, not only for our brother and sister who are married today, but all of us are to maintain this divine level.
Look around in the world today, as our brother has already said, and marriage is regarded as a temporary thing.  How awful!  What a departure that is!  But believers are to fill out the divine institution in the light of the mystery of Christ and the assembly, and, there is to be a testimony in substantiality.  What the Lord is looking for is something substantial; not just persons who have certain light, but the substantiality of that light worked out and expressed in our daily lives here.  Just as assembly persons think as Christ thinks, and have the mind of Christ, according to @1 Corinthians 2:16, so husband and wife should think alike.  There cannot be any sharing like the sharing of husband and wife.  How important this is, but how blessed to have some little part in fulfilling it.  May it be so, with each one of us here.  And may the Lord bless our brother and sister, in the light of this, and in the daily working out of it, for His glory.
Cumnock
1st August 1980
at a marriage meeting
{241}
LITTLE THINGS
@Luke 12:32; @Exodus 8:16-19; @Numbers 23:10; @Judges 16:22
These scriptures present little things.  We were saying in the reading that we are living in a day of small things.  We are not in the time of public glory as was manifest at Pentecost when there were obvious signs operating and no one could question the results of the power of God; nor are we living in the time of the pristine glory of the assembly answering to Paul's ministry before the breakdown; nor are we even living in the time of the recovery when there was distinctive ministry which was recognised in Christendom; in fact we are living in a time when that ministry largely has been rejected and there has been great reduction in the number of those who answer to the truth.  We are living in remnant conditions, in a day of small things publicly, yet in a day of great spiritual possibilities.
In the first scripture read the Lord refers to His disciples as a little flock, which suggests the feature of outward defencelessness.  A little flock is defenceless; the protection of a flock depends on the shepherd.  The Lord says here, "Fear not, little flock".  He said earlier, "Consider the ravens … God feeds them", @Luke 12:24.  The context of the passage shows the Lord's concern that His disciples should not be over-anxious about food and raiment -- material things.  It is the over-anxiousness which the Lord is concerned about, lest they should be so anxious about these things that they should forget what we had last night as to what is more important.  Of course we are to be righteous; we have to see to our livelihoods; but that is not to be the first thing with us.
The Lord says here, "Fear not, little flock".  There they were, a few disciples, and the Lord was about to leave them.  You will notice the mount of transfiguration is described in chapter 9 of the gospel of Luke and many chapters follow describing what took place in possibly only a very short time.  In chapter 9 the time of the Lord's receiving up was in view, and the Lord is fortifying His disciples in the following chapters in view of His absence.  When the Lord was here He protected them; the little flock were safe when the Lord was here; but now He was going to leave them, and they would be suffering, outwardly defenceless against opposition and persecution.  The Lord says, "Fear not, little flock, for it has been the good pleasure of your Father to give you the kingdom".  There is the kingdom, a whole order of things under God, in view of the support and the protection of this little flock.  There is our Father who is in the heavens, the Lord of heaven and earth; everything is under His control, and the objects of His chief interest are the little flock down here.  There is the Lord Jesus exalted, all power given to Him in heaven and on earth, and His chief interest is the little flock down here.  There is the presence of the Holy Spirit; there is the fellowship of one another, all such provision is involved in the kingdom, a divinely ordered arrangement of things for the support and protection of these few defenceless sheep.
He goes on to say in @Luke 12:33, "Sell what ye possess and give alms; make to yourselves purses which do not grow old, a treasure which does not fail in the heavens, where thief does not draw near nor moth destroy.  For where your treasure is, there also will your heart be".  We are not to be over-occupied with things down here; as Paul says in Philippians, "our commonwealth has its existence in the heavens", Phil 3:20.  The next move from heaven is what we ought to be expecting.  The Lord Jesus is sitting with His Father in His throne; any moment He will rise from that seat and come for His own and everything here will be altered.  We have a whole kingdom to support us; the gates of hades cannot prevail against this kingdom.  The Lord would therefore as a true Shepherd comfort His little flock.  We sometimes speak about the smallness of numbers available, but very few were available in Luke 12; the Lord gathered very few comparatively in His three-and-a-half years of service; He was not popular.  We need to be preserved from desiring to be popular.  He gathered the little flock and He was the Shepherd; they were His chief interest down here.  Therefore there was an abundant answer to their defencelessness.  This little flock were the flock of the One who was crucified.  The Lord did not retaliate, He did not defend Himself, when reviled He reviled not again, when suffering He threatened not, @1 Peter 2:23.  The little flock are to be like Him, prepared to suffer; their defence does not depend on their own actions, but the Shepherd who was crucified Himself will defend and support them.
Now in Exodus you have little things in testimony.  The feature with these gnats is testimony.  The little flock is defenceless but cared for by divine protection, but the gnats suggest testimony.  They are very little things, you can hardly see them.  They are despised; I suppose in the creational order of things they would be of the least value, but they make their presence known, and felt, very much so.  You could not deny their presence.  That is like the believer in this world at the present time, it is the evidence of life.  We were speaking about Paul in that hall of audience in the midst of all the pomp and the men of distinction.  Luke uses language that would give us the atmosphere of that pompous company.  Then they sent for Paul the prisoner; he would be like a gnat in that company; nobody would rise up when a prisoner came in; they would all rise up when Agrippa came in, but not when Paul came in.  How would he look, I wonder?  There he was; did he not make his presence felt; did he not embarrass all that company?
The gnats were not withdrawn and there is no warning given as to them.  In other signs Moses was told to warn Pharaoh, but here they just appeared, and in other plagues things were withdrawn, but not here; they continued.  In previous plagues the sorcerers imitated; but they were not able to imitate life.  The testimony here is to life, of no account in men's reckoning but in powerful testimony which cannot be gainsaid.  It says that "Aaron stretched out his hand with his staff, and smote the dust of the earth, and there arose gnats on man and on beast".  What beginnings! -- dust; it is really life out of death; it is in principle resurrection life.  That is what the believer has; just as our Saviour is in life out of death, so the believer is quickened with Him, that is, made to live in His life, and that kind of life is to be in testimony down here.  It is not pompous, nor presumptuous; it is outwardly insignificant, yet there is powerful testimony, little things, but powerful in life.  It says, "And the scribes did so with their sorceries, to bring forth gnats; but they could not... Then the scribes said to Pharaoh.  This is the finger of God!" The finger of God suggests that the believer is in testimony in life down here.
Now in the book of Numbers Balaam is speaking; he was a man in whom there was no work of God, and yet under God's control he said some wonderful things.  He says, "Who can count the dust of Jacob?"; it is not exactly the glory of Jacob, it is the dust of Jacob.  It no doubt would refer to the death of Jacob.  I believe it would have some bearing as to the death of Christ.  Who can count the dust of Jacob?  Who can reckon the great results from the death of Christ?  Think of the humiliating circumstances publicly in which Jesus died; hung upon a cross, men jeering at Him; there was not the slightest public evidence of God supporting Him.  During the first three hours of the Lord's suffering, from the third to the sixth hour, in daylight, ignominy was hurled at Him.  It was public humiliation of the worst kind; it was the worst that men could do, with Satan behind them.  They said, "He trusted upon God; let him save him now if he will have him", @Matthew 27:43.  It was public humiliation of the worst kind, and there was no public evidence of God supporting Him, but think of the results of the dust of Jacob, the great results of the death of Christ!  There was never anything so humiliating as that which Jesus suffered -- but what great results!  "Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel?  Let my soul die the death of the righteous".  Balaam did not die thus, but Jesus died the death of the righteous.  Who can reckon the great results from it?  "In his humiliation", the prophet said, "his judgment has been taken away", @Acts 8:33.  We will be strengthened in the conditions of humiliation and reproach in which we are as we think of the humiliating circumstances in which Jesus was found.  This should encourage us.
Now in the last scripture, in Judges, we have Samson, also in humiliating circumstances.  How did he come into these circumstances?  Who was the cause of it?  He was the cause.  Samson's own failure was the reason for his being found in such humiliating circumstances.  This has a bearing on ourselves.  Much that we suffer in humiliation is not the reproach of the Christ, but reproach which we have brought upon ourselves because of certain departure from the truth, certain extremes which marked us which we have faced and judged, yet some governmental result remains, just as with Samson here.  There were two men in the Old Testament who suffered for their own sins; one was David and the other was Samson, and it is a comfort to read the histories of these men because they have a bearing on our own time.  Delilah tempted Samson and the amazing thing was he knew he was being tempted, he knew what her object was, and yet he succumbed, he disclosed the secret he had with God.  He thought, "I will go out as at other times before, and disengage myself.  And he knew not that Jehovah had departed from him", Judg 16:20.  What a sad situation!  The Philistines seized him, put out his eyes, brought him down to Gazah and bound him with fetters of bronze, and he had to grind in the prison-house.  "But", it says, "the hair of his head began to grow"; it is life in humiliating circumstances; it is life in smallness.  Previously Samson could speak about the seven locks of his head; he cannot speak here about the seven locks of his head; "But the hair of his head began to grow", and this is the kind of day we are in.  There is not much to make an impact on Christendom, but there is to be reality and revival and a little power.  Samson in the end slew more Philistines than in all his life.
That is all I have to say.  Do not let us bemoan too much the littleness of things; let us realise what God can do with little things.  The little flock so precious to Him, persons who are true to the principles of the assembly, are of special interest to heaven.  Let us continue in the testimony in life and let us not be discouraged by outward circumstances, or by fewness of numbers.  Let us be real and maintain what is true to the Lord Jesus until He come, for His Name's sake.
Gőteborg, Sweden
9th August 1980
{246}
HAVING RESPECT TO THE RECOMPENSE
@Matthew 12:46-50; @Matthew 19:28,29; @Mark 14:3-9; @John 12:25,26
In the Epistle to the Hebrews chapter 11 and verses 25 and 26, Moses is referred to because of his faith; it says, of him, "choosing rather to suffer affliction along with the people of God than to have the temporary pleasure of sin; esteeming the reproach of the Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, for he had respect to the recompense" (@Hebrews 11:25,26).  I desire to speak about having respect to the recompense.  Moses was brought up in Pharaoh's court, he became a man mighty in his words and his deeds in the land of Egypt, see @Acts 7:22.  Think of all the prospects in the world that lay before Moses, but he was counting and reckoning differently from men.  It says, "esteeming the reproach of the Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt".  Egypt was the world power at that time, and in recent times wonderful treasures have been discovered there.  Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater, "for he had respect to the recompense".  He would say, 'If I proceed in life in Egypt's court, what would be the end of it?  It would be disaster as to any knowledge of God'.  He would have shone before men for a few years and then he would have had nothing.  He began to reckon in another way, he had respect to the recompense.
We have been exhorting one another to commit ourselves to the will of God; that means that we have to deny ourselves, deny our own will; it costs something.  But to have respect to the recompense would greatly help us in our committal.  Dear young friend, if you go on your own way, I do not care how much wealth you may amass in this world, it will end in emptiness and nothingness, but if you commit yourself to the will of God I can assure you the end will be glorious.  It is good to have respect to the recompense.
In this scripture in Matthew 12 the Lord's natural relatives thought they had a claim on Him.  But the Lord says, "Who is my mother, and who are my brethren?  And, stretching out his hand to his disciples, he said, Behold my mother and my brethren; for whosoever shall do the will of my Father who is in the heavens, he is my brother, and sister, and mother".  The Lord Jesus was fully devoted, was perfect and absolute in His committal to the will of His Father, and if anyone here is prepared to commit himself or herself to the will of the same Person to whom the Lord committed Himself,  He is prepared to stretch out His hand and say, "He is my brother, and sister".  Think of that recompense!  Here were a few disciples who followed Jesus, and He stretched out His hand to them; He is pointing them out; He is assuring them of His approval.  There is nothing more blessed, in one sense, than to have a sense of the Lord's approval.  It is worthwhile foregoing our own will and being prepared to be under reproach in this world to have the Lord's approval.  One of the hymns says --
For how will recompense His smile
The suff'rings of this "little while"!
(Hymn 413)
This is having respect to the recompense.  The Lord owns a person who is committed to the will of His Father as kindred to Himself -- "He is my brother, and sister"; it is the Lord approving and regarding such persons as His own kindred, like Himself morally.
Every believer is kindred with Christ according to divine purpose, but not every believer is kindred with Christ morally.  It is the one who does the will of His Father who is in the heavens whom the Lord owns as kindred with Him morally.  Would you not like to have the experience of the Lord's approval, the Lord stretching out His hand and saying, He is My brother; she is My sister?  What could be more blessed for the believer than to have a sense of the Lord's own approval?  Those kindred with the Lord Jesus morally are committed to the will of His Father, to whom He was committed when He was here.  There would be a difference in measure, but the same character, and this is open to every one of us.  We can decide, just where we are at this moment, to be believers committed to the will of His Father.  I am a great believer in things happening in the meeting, in persons being affected as we are together.  I would not say, Go home and kneel down by your bedside and commit yourself to the Lord.  Many influences may come in between your sitting here and arriving home.  Commit yourself now; have a secret committal in your heart to the Lord Jesus in the atmosphere in which you are now.  I trust it is attractive to every one of us to be approved of the Lord as of His brethren morally.  It is the Lord's own appreciation of persons like Himself in character.  It says, "stretching out his hand to his disciples".  That is, He is prepared to support such persons and defend them, because there will be burdens to carry, there will be sorrows to sustain; this all goes against what we are naturally, but the Lord would stretch out His hand and support persons like this.  His outstretched hand would assure us of His support every step of the journey.
Now in Matthew 19 the Lord speaks to the disciples of recompense.  He addresses them as, "ye who have followed me".  It is a way of suffering, of discipleship, following the Lord Jesus.  It was never an easy way; it was never meant to be an easy way; it is a way of suffering and cost which builds up moral fibre; it builds up manhood according to God.  The Lord says here, "ye who have followed me", in the way of suffering publicly and reproach, the reproach of Christ, but He speaks of "the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit down upon his throne of glory".  Dear brethren, there is going to be a regeneration, there is going to be another order of things altogether.  The present time we are in is one of suffering, as I have said, and reproach, but there is going to be a reordering of things.  The Son of man who suffered, was crucified, shall sit upon His throne of glory; it refers to what we speak of as the world to come.  The light of the world to come needs to be more before us, dear brethren; what a regeneration!  How different the order of things will be then!  It is a reproach to confess the Name of the Lord Jesus at the present time; how different when the Son of man shall sit upon His throne of glory.  He has a right to that throne of glory.  He is not yet sitting down on His throne of glory; He is sitting with His Father in His throne, the Father's throne, which is a time of great advantage for men and for believers.  The Lord has been there nearly two thousand years, but that is not the permanent position; it is really a temporary position.
The next move of the Lord Jesus is going to alter the whole situation.  The Lord Jesus is sitting with His Father in His throne; a moment will come very soon when He will rise from that position and come for His own at the rapture, and proceed to take up things in this world with a view to His sitting on His own throne.  We are sometimes occupied with events down here, and events among the nations have some interest, but the movement that is going to alter the whole situation is not the movement of nations down here, but the movement of the Lord Jesus from His present position.  We read of "the patience of the Christ", @2 Thessalonians 3:5.  He is patiently waiting to come for His own and will proceed to take His own throne.  In the meantime we suffer reproach, but let us have respect to the recompense, for every item of faithfulness to the Lord Jesus here will be rewarded in the world to come, in the regeneration, the new arrangement of things.  Obviously the arrangement of things down here now is not according to God's mind; it will be when the Lord takes His own throne, when every enemy will be subdued, when the Lord will deal with opposing elements in judgment and clear the whole universe for the pleasure of God.  Let us have respect to the recompense; let us have respect to the world to come, the regeneration.  Let us realise that things are not always going to be as they are now, there is going to be a thorough rearrangement.
So this woman in Mark 14 expresses her devotion to the Lord.  The opportunity arose "when he was in Bethany"; He was in her locality, and she was available to honour Him.  It was a privilege that came her way, and she availed herself of it.  I wonder how many of us are like this woman; she had something to bestow upon the Lord Jesus, "an alabaster flask of ointment of pure nard, very costly; and having broken the alabaster flask, she poured it out upon his head".  It is something irrevocable, the flask is not to be filled again, it is a pouring out of what was in herself really, just as Paul said, "I am already being poured out", 2 Tim 4:6.  He exhorts Timothy to fill up the full measure of his ministry.  Paul says, I am being poured out, that is, he had filled up his full measure and was being poured out, and he encourages Timothy to fill up his full measure.
The Lord says about this woman, "What she could she has done".  I suppose very few of us are like this woman.  Most of us could do a little more, or a great deal more, but the Lord's assessment of this woman was, "What she could she has done"; she filled up her full measure.  We were speaking in the reading about each one having a measure; every believer has a measure of faith, @Romans 12:3.  Are we exercised to know what our measure is and fill it up to the full?  To each one has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ, see @Ephesians 4:7.  Would we be exercised to know what that measure is?  Would we be prepared to fill it up to the full?
One of the exercises amongst brethren in localities is to get the most out of one another, and to get the best out of one another.  Most of us could contribute more.  When opportunity arises in our comings together, how many of us could contribute more than we do?  Many of us could be more ready to pray at the beginning and the end of the meeting.  Do brothers all fill out their full measure in this service?  Is it left just to a few to do so?  This is a universal exercise.  I remember a brother in our city saying that to pray at the beginning or close of a meeting is not a question of being moved, it is simply a matter of being at liberty with God.  All this comes into the filling out of our measure.  If services like that are left to a few they have to do it, but let us be all exercised to fill the full measure of what is committed to us.  "What she could she has done" -- it is a matter of being available when the opportunity arises, and the Lord appreciates this.
To have a sense of the Lord's appreciation is a very great matter; it is recompense indeed.  This woman acts with spiritual understanding; the Lord had spoken to the twelve about His death; they did not understand, but this woman did; it may be she was the only one who understood.  How the Lord appreciates that!  He says, "What she could she has done.  She has beforehand anointed my body for the burial.  And verily I say unto you, Wheresoever these glad tidings may be preached in the whole world, what this woman has done shall be also spoken of for a memorial of her".  What a commendation that was!  What a recompense was given to this woman!  We need to have respect to recompense like this; a sense of the Lord's appreciation, and approval.  The Lord says here, "Wheresoever these glad tidings may be preached"; localities are in mind, it is not whensoever but wheresoever; the Lord is looking for this kind of feature in all our localities.  This woman might have been surprised when the Lord commended her so highly; she would say, 'I did just what I felt like doing; I just did what I desired to do'.  But there is the Lord's commendation of it.  What recompense, dear brethren; let us have respect to it.
In John 12 the Lord said in verse 24, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit".  That is, the death of Christ produces a fruit after His own kind.  This verse presents a certain aspect of the death of our Lord Jesus Christ; it is not exactly the suffering side, and certainly it is not the atoning side; it is His death as producing fruit like Himself.  Now the Lord immediately says, "He that loves his life shall lose it, and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it to life eternal".  This must link with what the Lord had just said.  The Lord gave His life; He laid down His life.  Those like Him, the fruit of His death, would be disciples, prepared to lose their lives here in devotion to the Lord Jesus; His death producing persons like this.  The much fruit, I suppose, would have in view the many families named of the Father, all made possible through the death of Christ.  But the Lord here immediately calls attention to the need for true discipleship, which can be only by having an object outside of ourselves, the Lord Jesus Christ.  Then He says, "If any one serve me, let him follow me".  Does any one desire to serve the Lord?  Serving the Lord does not belong to a certain class of persons.  Serving the Lord is open to every one, every brother and every sister.  The Lord says, "If any one serve me, let him follow me"; He does not even say, 'If any man serve me', but, 'If any one serve me'.  Then the recompense is, "and where I am, there also shall be my servant".  What a privilege! "where I am, there also shall be my servant".  That will be true ultimately.  The Lord speaks more than once in this gospel of "where I am"; in chapter 14 He says, "that where I am ye also may be", John 14:3.  That will be the ultimate at the coming of the Lord.  But "where I am, there also shall be my servant", I think we could apply to where the Lord is in any conflict, in any issue that is raised, "where I am"; where He is in any matter, "there also shall be my servant".  There are few things that could be so attractive to us as to being with the Lord in any matter, having His mind about any matter which may arise, whether it be locally or universally; "where I am, there also shall be my servant".
Then He says, "If any one serve me, him shall the Father honour".  What could be more blessed than to be honoured by the Father?  The Lord Jesus received from the Father honour and glory.  He is distinctive as to the honour He received from His Father, but "If any one serve me, him shall the Father honour".  That is something, dear brethren, of recompense.  What blessed recompense!  Let us all have respect to the recompense and be prepared for the exercise involved; respect to the recompense will strengthen us to face whatever exercises we are called upon to face according to the will of His Father who is in the heavens.  May we all be encouraged of the Lord for His Name's sake.
Cologne
1st November 1980
{252}
WISDOM
@Proverbs 4:7; @1 Corinthians 1:30; @1 Corinthians 12:7-9 (to "Spirit")
These scriptures emphasise the importance of wisdom for wisdom is given the premier place in each of them.  We usually, and rightly, regard righteousness as our leader, and when it comes to a matter of principle, righteousness is our leader, but there is a great need of wisdom.  One of the most important features needed in our localities at the moment is wisdom.  Thank God for an understanding of principles and a desire to pursue righteousness, but there is a special need of wisdom.  According to Proverbs wisdom is a feature that belongs to the family, and is needed in the family.  Solomon writes as a father; he begins chapter 4, "Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father".  Wisdom is for children, for sons.  It goes along with sonship.  "Hear, my son", Solomon says in verse 10.
"The beginning of wisdom is, Get wisdom".  The first thing that is going to help us, dear brethren, is to realise the need for wisdom, and to apply ourselves to get wisdom.  If we do not see the need for wisdom we are not very likely to get it.  There is a crying need for wisdom in every locality.  We can look back in our city's history in Edinburgh -- and I suppose it would apply in Plainfield -- and see how many things could have been avoided if wisdom had been operating.  You might be able to prove from Scripture and from ministry that what was done was right, but was it wisdom?  Was it wise?  Could sorrow have been avoided if wisdom had been applied?  For things to be right is not sufficient for the family.  What is needed is wisdom.  Once we realise that, we shall begin to desire that wisdom should operate in our localities.  "The beginning of wisdom is, Get wisdom; and with all thy getting get intelligence".  Let us set ourselves to get.
It says in verse 5, "Get wisdom, get intelligence -- forget it not; neither decline from the words of my mouth.  Forsake her not, and she shall keep thee; love her, and she shall preserve thee.  The beginning of wisdom is," (or it may be rendered, Wisdom is the principal thing) "Get wisdom; and with all thy getting get intelligence".  I am saying this to myself, as well as to the brethren here.  Let us see the need every week in our assembly history locally for wisdom.
We come to the verse we read in Corinthians, "But of him" (that is, of God) "are ye in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God".  The first thing mentioned is wisdom, secondly, righteousness; not that righteousness is not our leader (for it is when it comes to principle), but in the application of principle wisdom is mentioned first.  Corinth was a locality, just as we are here, just as they would have been at Edinburgh a few hours ago, at a meeting of this character.  Paul writes, "Of him" (of God) "are ye in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God".  Wisdom from God is available to us in Christ Jesus; He has been made to us wisdom from God.  Wisdom resides in our Lord Jesus Christ who is Head, and is to be drawn upon when needed in any given situation.  In Proverbs 8, in that remarkable chapter where wisdom is personified, we read in verse 22, "Jehovah possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old".  Wisdom as a quality was in reserve in divine operations.  Before His works of old, wisdom was there.  "I was set up from eternity, from the beginning, before the earth was".  Then he says, "When there were no depths, I was brought forth".  That is, wisdom was brought forth when needed in the creation of this world in which we are.  It was always there in reserve, but brought forth, brought out, and drawn upon, when needed as divine resource in these great operations, at the very beginning of things.
If Jehovah, in His operations creationally, drew upon wisdom, how much more do we need to in our operations, because the Lord leaves things to us in our localities.  Christ Jesus has been made to us wisdom from God.  Once we understand, according to Proverbs 4, the need for wisdom in any situation, then we know where it is -- it is in Christ Jesus, and it can be drawn upon from Him.
In @1 Corinthians 12, when we come to the practical operations and manifestations of the Spirit, it is very interesting that the first thing mentioned is the word of wisdom.  Other things are mentioned, but the word of wisdom comes first.  "For to one, by the Spirit, is given the word of wisdom".  We can look back -- I know we can in our city -- and see how many sorrows, how many difficulties, could have been avoided if there had been, at the right time, the word of wisdom.  If there is at any time the word of wisdom it ought to be heeded.  The same Spirit operates other features also, but the first feature mentioned is the word of wisdom.
James helps us in this; because he tells us in James 1:4, "Let endurance have its perfect work, that ye may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing".  And then he says, "But if any one of you lack wisdom" -- as much as to say that the most likely thing to be lacking is wisdom.  That is true of us individually, and it is often true of us locally.  Divine principles are known; righteousness is followed usually, but the most likely thing to be lacking is wisdom.  He says, "If any one of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all freely and reproaches not".  There is abundance of wisdom available to us, in Christ, from God.  Wisdom is resource in any given situation.  Wisdom has been often spoken of as the handmaid of love, and as the form love takes.  Family feelings can be fostered by the operation of wisdom.  It belongs to the family.  In James 3:17, he tells us, "The wisdom from above first is pure".  We need to be pure to look for wisdom; we need purity of motive, love out of a pure heart.
That is all I have to say, but I can see, in our own city, and in other cities, how many difficulties could be avoided by wisdom.  How many difficulties could be settled in a few hours by the operation of wisdom.  Some may say, 'We are right'.  Others may say, 'We are right'.  Maybe they are in some way, but where is wisdom?  Where is the wisdom?  May the Lord help us to realise the need for wisdom, and to draw upon the Lord for wisdom whenever needed in any situation, for God's glory.
Plainfield
16th December 1980
{255}
BEING SERVICEABLE
@Genesis 22:1-3; @Genesis 37:12-16 (to "my brethren"); @Exodus 3:2-4; @Isaiah 6:1-8
I desire to speak about being serviceable.  It is not my intention to speak about service or serving.  Serving involves activity, and serving can even become an objective, unduly so, but being serviceable is a state.  In Paul's second epistle to Timothy, which was written for the very day in which we live, when there is departure from the truth, breakdown and confusion, Paul wrote about being serviceable as a vessel to honour.  There are vessels to dishonour who attach the Lord's name to what is unsuitable to Him; that is dishonouring to Him.  Christendom is the great house, as Paul speaks about it, and we are all part of the great house.  When we speak about Christendom, we are not to think of something outside of ourselves because we are part of it; we are part of the great house, but it is possible to be a vessel to honour in the great house.  "In a great house there are not only gold and silver vessels, but also wooden and earthen; and some to honour, and some to dishonour.  If therefore one shall have purified himself from these, (in separating himself from them) he shall be a vessel to honour", 2 Tim 2: 20, 21.  'Separation from Evil God's Principle of Unity' was one of the early tracts written by Mr Darby.  Remember, it is separation from evil, not separation for separation's sake but separation from vessels to dishonour, from persons who are dishonouring to the Lord.  It goes on to say, he shall be a vessel to honour, sanctified" -- sanctified means set apart for God's holy purposes -- "serviceable to the Master, prepared for every good work".  May every one of us here desire to be serviceable to the Master, prepared for every good work.  There are those who have a judgment about what is wrong but feel they ought to stay in it to help others.  That is not God's way; it is not the way that Paul indicates in the second epistle to Timothy.  He says, "in separating himself from them, he shall be a vessel to honour" and he will be "prepared for every good work".
I have read of persons in the Old Testament, each one of whom said "Here am I"; that is the attitude of serviceability.  I would like every one of us here myself included, to be concerned to be in the state of being serviceable.  Abraham was a mature man who learned to know God, and one whom God knew.  God could say about him, "I know him" Gen 18:19.  He was one in whom God had confidence, whom God could trust.  It says here, "God tried Abraham, and said to him, Abraham! and he said, Here am I".  He was a vessel to honour sanctified, serviceable, prepared for every good work.  What was the good work he was going to undertake?  What was the purpose of it?  God asked him to do certain things for His own pleasure; God wanted to have pleasure in every movement Abraham made.  If we are to be serviceable, the first thing to have in mind is, serviceable to the Master, serviceable in view of the pleasure of God.  It is not just doing something that I want to do.  We were referring somewhere recently to anyone who may say, I think I could make a good missionary; I think that would just suit me, to go out to some foreign country and be a missionary; I think my qualities would just be filled out in that kind of work.  That is the wrong way round.  It is a question of being serviceable for divine pleasure, waiting on indications from the Lord what to do, not taking the initiative as to what I think I ought to do, and so with less matters than becoming missionaries.  We often have things the wrong way round.  But Abraham said "Here am I"; he was in that state of being serviceable.  He might have shrunk from what was committed to him but he did not.
As you read these verses you can think of Jehovah looking down from heaven and watching Abraham in every move he made and every step he took.  It says, "Abraham rose early in the morning".  He might have waited until the afternoon, or the next day, but no, "Here am I", serviceable to the Master, prepared for every good work in view of divine pleasure.  He "rose early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son; and he clave the wood for the burnt-offering, and rose up and went to the place that God had told him of".  "On the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the place from afar".  I believe that in every movement Abraham made in this section Jehovah had pleasure, in fact God saw in Abraham's movements and Abraham's feelings how He Himself would feel when His beloved Son was here.  How remarkable that Abraham was serviceable in view of filling out something that was for God's own pleasure.  "Isaac spoke to Abraham his father, and said, My father!  And he said, Here am I, my son".  Think of the affection between Abraham and Isaac!  It is all typical of the Lord Jesus and of His sacrifice.  Abraham was serviceable and prepared to sacrifice in view of the divine pleasure and God's own satisfaction.  What an objective to have before us!  Is it not worthwhile being serviceable in view of yielding some pleasure to the heart of the blessed God?  What a privilege we have!  Is it not worthwhile being a vessel to honour, facing exercises of separation, of sanctification?  We are to be sanctified persons.  A sanctified person will know how to be separate.  It is not a question of obeying certain rules of separation, but if I can view myself and continually think of myself as a sanctified person set apart for divine pleasure, I will know how to be separate when I ought to be separate, and to be in this state of serviceability.  Abraham was serviceable in view of the pleasure of God.  Joseph was serviceable in view of the welfare of his brethren, and his brethren were far from being all they ought to be.  Abraham was a mature man, over one hundred years old, a man who had learned God over many years; Joseph was a youth of seventeen, a teenager we would say in present day language.  He "fed the flock with his brethren; and he was doing service with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives.  And Joseph brought to his father an evil report of them".  These are among the very persons that Joseph, at the age of seventeen, is prepared to be serviceable to with a view to seeking their welfare.  Joseph was available; he was sent out from the vale of Hebron, from the enjoyment of his father's love, to seek the welfare of his brethren.  This exercise lasted over twenty years.  Jacob said to him, "Go, I pray thee, see after the welfare of thy brethren, and after the welfare of the flock; and bring me word again".  Joseph never brought word again; he was the victim of his brethren's animosity, sold into Egypt; he did not even see his brethren after this for over twenty years.  He had a long time of suffering.  Did he give up the service because of the difficulties?  No, he did not.  He had certain light in his soul; Joseph was conscious of his father's love.  It is good for every one of us to be conscious of being loved, not only loved by your parents but loved by God, having a place in the heart of the Lord Jesus.  In principle that was Joseph here, he was conscious of being loved.  What sustained him in all his sufferings, including being in prison, was the sense of his father's love.  Another thing that governed him was the light he had in his dreams.  He had light as to his brethren eventually coming round, and he had in type light as to the exaltation of Christ and Christ having His true place among His people, and the light of these things sustained Joseph over twenty years of exercise he had to go through.  When Joseph saw his brethren after these twenty years it says he remembered the dreams which he dreamt, see Gen 42:9.  He did not remember the ill deeds of his brethren, he remembered the light he had in his soul, that in spite of what did not look promising at all, his brethren were going to come round.  Then he served his brethren with remarkable skill.  The wisdom with which he operated with regard to his brethren came from the love he had for them.  Wisdom is the form love takes in certain circumstances.  Joseph knew when to be severe because he spoke harshly to them, but he was not all severity; he acted with them in grace; he gave them money back in their sacks.  The fact that they had their money back affected them more than the severe speaking; they were in consternation when they saw they had their money back.  That is Joseph acting in grace, there was a balance of severity when needed, and grace when needed.  Sometimes in dealing with our brethren we are severe when we ought to be gracious, and sometimes we are too gracious when we ought to stand for righteousness.  In working amongst our brethren, we need wisdom, skill, and that was Joseph's dealing with his brethren.  We need to learn it from Christ Himself.  Joseph is typical of Christ.
When he was asked in chapter 37, "What seekest thou", he said, "I am seeking my brethren".  This is Joseph serviceable, you might say, in relation to his local brethren, in relation to improvement of conditions in bringing in love and unity.  They were a disunited family; they had four mothers and there was contention and hatred.  Joseph is with God and in the state of being serviceable and never gives up the securing of his brethren according to God.  Are we all prepared to be serviceable for God's pleasure as with Abraham, but prepared to serve our brethren, seeking the welfare of our brethren?  Paul was prepared in Corinth not only to spend but to be spent, even if in the more abundantly loving them he was less loved, see @2 Corinthians 12:15.  Oh, we need this attitude.  The Samaritan said to the innkeeper when he left him two pence, "whatsoever thou shalt expend more", @Luke 10:35.  We hear sometimes -- I have said it myself -- I have done my bit, I have done my share.  We need to be prepared to spend and be spent, not only what we think would be our share, but be like Joseph here in seeking the welfare of our brethren.
We come now to Moses; he sees the thorn-bush burning.  This made an initial impression upon Moses.  He speaks later of "the good will of him that dwelt in the bush", Deut 33:16.  He never forgot this impression of Jehovah in the thorn-bush.  It would be a common sight in the wilderness to see a thorn-bush in flames and in just a few moments finished, but what attracted Moses' attention was that it was not being consumed; it was burning and burning and burning but it was not being consumed.  It is a type of God being with His people, contrary and difficult as they are.  Read the Book of Numbers and you see the difficulties, the rebellion, the murmurings, they even tempted God in the wilderness journey, but God remained with them, the cloud remained with them.  It is remarkable to know that God is continuing patiently with His people.  God was severe, many perished in the wilderness, in fact all who were numbered in chapter one perished but Caleb and Joshua, and a new generation came into the land; but "I Jehovah change not" is what we read in Malachi 3:6, which may refer to the bush:  "I Jehovah change not, and ye, sons of Jacob, are not consumed".  God does not change his purpose regarding His people; He does not change His mind about them because of the difficulties and the way in which he has to contend with them.  This is involved in the bush burning, and in the light of it Jehovah calls "Moses, Moses!  And he said, Here am I".  He is serviceable.  But what was committed to him was a responsibility, and when responsibility was put upon Moses he was not prepared for it.  He brings forward reasons why the responsibility that God was going to put upon him should not be taken up by him.  Are we not like that sometimes?  We can find all sorts of excuses why we should not be serviceable in taking up responsibility.  It was a great responsibility Moses was to undertake; he was to be responsible for two million people for forty years, but he was so reluctant to take it up that God became angry with him.  There is innate with some of us a slowness to take on responsibility locally.  You might say Moses had a very low thought of himself, and so he had, and we all need to have, we all need to be aware of our nothingness, but if God lays a responsibility on us do not make too many excuses.  I would encourage anyone here on whom the Lord lays responsibility to answer to it.  That is the lesson we learn here with Moses.  He is immediately serviceable in saying, Here am I, but when the responsibility is laid upon him he is not so sure.  So let us search our hearts to be prepared to be serviceable for we ought all to be prepared to take on some responsibility.  It has been said, rightly I believe, that if we are not prepared to take on any responsibility we are hardly in fellowship, because fellowship involves some share of responsibility taken on by us.
Now Isaiah, in the verses we read, "saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up".  What a sight it was for Isaiah to see Christ exalted!  Then he saw seraphim standing above him and each had six wings.  Seraphim are not real creatures, they are symbolic, I understand.  "Seraphim were standing above him: each had six wings; with twain he covered his face".  What is suited to be serviceable to the Lord these seraphim set out.  Each had six wings but they were not all used in flying; with two they covered their faces, they are to be out of sight.  Oh what a lesson this is to learn!  In the light of the exaltation of Christ, one who is serviceable has to be as far as possible out of sight.  We were reminded the other day about John the baptist; he sets this out.  They sent from Jerusalem, from the centre of the religious world, and asked who he was.  Art thou the Christ?  He said "No", only "the voice of one crying in the wilderness", John 1:23.  In principle he was covering his face.  Paul said, in the light of the glory of the mystery that was committed to him, "To me, less than the least of all saints", @Ephesians 3:8.  The seraphim with two of their wings covered their face.  They were to be out of sight in view of the exaltation of Christ.  We spoke earlier about service and how ambition to serve might govern us; let us learn this; with twain they covered their face.  With twain they covered their feet; they were not occupied with their activity, it is a question of the exaltation of Christ.  To be serviceable rightly has to be in view of Christ being glorified, of Him being presented, not the one who serves presented; as far as possible he is to be out of sight.  "And one called to the other and said, Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah of hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory!".  Then it says "and the house was filled with smoke.  And I said, Woe unto me! for I am undone; for I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of hosts.  And one of the seraphim flew unto me, and he had in his hand a glowing coal, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar; and he made it touch my mouth".  There is the answer in the glad tidings, in the application of the death of Christ.  Notice this seraph took the glowing coal with tongs from off the altar.  Only One could meet these glowing coals and the suffering and the cost involved, and that was the Sufferer, the Lord Jesus Himself.  But the application of it is the answer to what we are according to the flesh.  So Isaiah says here, "I heard the voice of the Lord saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?  And I said, Here am I; send me".  The emphasis is not on 'me'; it is not 'send me', it is 'send me'.  It is a desire to be serviceable on the part of Isaiah.  Now I trust there may be, with the young and all of us, begotten in our hearts and minds a desire to be serviceable to the Lord.  We can all do something, for God's pleasure, in taking on responsibility, in seeking the promotion of the Lord Himself and His interests.
Another who said, Here am I, was Ananias.  When Saul was apprehended on the Damascus road he was led to the house of one called Judas; and then the Lord spoke to Ananias, and Ananias immediately said, "Behold, here am I, Lord", @Acts 9:10.  He was serviceable, one who knew the Lord, who knew His word and was prepared to answer to it.  But Ananias has to accept adjustment.  That is another important matter.  If we are to be in the state of being serviceable, we have to be prepared to accept adjustment.  Ananias's thoughts were wrong.  "And the Lord said to him in a vision, Ananias.  And he said, Behold, here am I, Lord", and the word was to "Rise up and go into the street which is called Straight, and seek in the house of Judas one by name Saul, he is of Tarsus: for, behold, he is praying".  He is praying; that should have helped Ananias, but Ananias thought he knew better than the Lord.  He tried to adjust the Lord; that is how strong we can be in our ideas.  Do not let us make mistakes.  We think we know better than the Lord sometimes as Ananias did.  He says "Lord, I have heard from many concerning this man" and so on.  "And the Lord said to him, Go, for this man is an elect vessel to me".  So Ananias was prepared to go, having accepted adjustment.  Being really serviceable often means that we have to be prepared to be adjusted in our thoughts and outlook.  Ananias was only about a day late in his information, but he has to become adjusted by the Lord; the Lord is prepared to adjust us.  We need to be adjustable if we are going to be serviceable.  May the Lord help us to be more serviceable, for His sake.
Toronto
10th January 1981
{262}
DEVOTION AND COMMITTAL
@Matthew 28:1-10
I desire to say a few words about this chapter for our encouragement.  It describes certain features of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus.  We have no description of the actual resurrection but we have certain circumstances that surround it.  The resurrection of the Lord Jesus was secret; no eye witnessed the Lord Jesus coming out of the tomb, but since He stepped out of the tomb He has maintained, and never given up, the initiative.  He set something on and has maintained it from that moment right down to the present day.  We are to be exercised to be intelligently involved in the initiative that the Lord is maintaining at the present time.
These two women came to look at the sepulchre and they found an angel sitting on the stone which he had rolled away.  "There was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord, descending out of heaven, came and rolled away the stone and sat upon it".  There is contempt in the fact that he sat upon it.  What power and authority were with that angel!  "His look was as lightning, and his clothing white as snow.  And for fear of him the guards trembled and became as dead men".  Every opposition, every obstacle, was overcome.  The angel answering said to the women, "Fear not ye".  The guards became as dead men but the angel said to the women, "Fear not ye, for I know that ye seek Jesus the crucified one".  The divine initiative was to be understood by persons who were devoted to the crucified One and who were able to bear the public reproach that attached to Him.  He is the living One, and they came to know Him as the living One, but they were able for the reproach of the crucified One.  I suppose these were two of the women who stood by the cross in John 19.  Mary of Magdala certainly was one of them; they were prepared to be publicly identified with the crucified One.  That is a test for every one of us; it is a test for our young people at school and older ones in offices and workshops, but these are the persons who become initiated into the understanding of what the Lord is doing.  "Fear not ye", the angel said, "He is not here, for he is risen, as he said".
Then the angel invites them, "Come, see the place where the Lord lay".  They come under direction; they accept direction.  That would also be a test for every one of us, whether we are living by the Lord's direction or living our own lives according to our own ideas.  These women are in the divine initiative.  None of us, nor all of us together, are able for the initiative.  The Lord has the initiative and we are to be concerned to be in the initiative that the Lord is setting on and maintaining.  The women who were prepared to be identified with the crucified One are subject to divine direction.  There are certain directions, certain commandments, that are to be regarded as obligatory or we are not really in the initiative the Lord is maintaining.
These women go out quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, and run to bring His disciples word.  As initiated into the Lord's directions they are subject and they move quickly; they run.  They are in it with enthusiasm and with devotion.  How much that is needed in our day because we tend to be half-hearted.  We tend to put our own things first and the Lord's things come second, or in some third or fourth place maybe.  True joy only comes from being committed and devoted.
Then the Lord Himself confirms them.  The angel directed them, and these women were subject to the direction and the Lord confirms them in it.  Ministry gives us some idea of divine direction and as we commit ourselves to it the Lord Himself would confirm it to us by the Spirit.  We would have a sense of the Lord's approval.  There would be something sadly lacking in our lives if we did not have some sense of the Lord's approval.  It would not be public; it would be something secret, by the Spirit, but the Lord would give us some sense that He approves of the course we are on.
All is set on by the Lord and then in the section from verse 11 the enemy becomes active; but he is too late.  He deceives some; we know how busy the enemy is in deceiving; but already something is set on.  It is interesting to read the first three chapters of the Acts and find Christianity established and there is no word of any opposition, nor any activity of the enemy.  Not until chapter 4 does the enemy become active; but it is too late.  Things are already established; the Holy Spirit has formed the house; the body of Christ is already formed.  The enemy does not have the initiative; the Lord has.  Once the Lord sets things on the enemy attacks and would corrupt if we allowed him, but it is a great encouragement to see that the Lord is the Initiator.
So in the last section the eleven disciples went into Galilee to the mountain which Jesus had appointed them.  There are certain appointments in Christianity -- the Lord's supper, meetings which are announced; are not these appointments?  Do we regard them as appointments?  Do we regard them as optional or are they appointments?  We are not likely to be maintained in the divine initiative unless we regard divine appointments.  Then it says, "When they saw him, they did homage to him".  We are always safe as we are maintained in a worshipful attitude towards our Lord Jesus.  Some doubted, and sometimes that weakness comes in with us, but the Lord's word dispels every doubt.  He says, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth".  The enemy is mighty; there is One who is almighty -- "All power has been given me".  What words these are for us in our time, when things around seem confused and weak.  The enemy would use public conditions to depress us, but what a word this is, "All power has been given me".  God the Father has given Him all power in heaven and upon earth.  Has the Lord lost any of that power?  Of course He has not.  This is true up to the present day, and the Lord says, "Behold, I am with you all the days, until the completion of the age".
Let us all be interested in what the Lord is maintaining.  He set things up here and He is maintaining them at the present time.  What was established at Pentecost is maintained now in persons who are devoted to the crucified One, who are subject to divine direction, and who have worshipful spirits.  These are the persons who continue in what the Lord is maintaining.  May the Lord encourage every one of us to be devoted and committed.
Grangemouth
28th April 1981
{265}
"ONE ANOTHER"
@1 Peter 1:22-25; @1 Peter 2:1-3; @1 Peter 4:7-11; @1 Peter 5:5,14
This very interesting epistle was written by Peter to sojourners of the dispersion, Hebrew believers who suffered governmentally.  The Jewish nation suffered and these believers suffered along with the nation as sojourners of the dispersion in these various Roman provinces.  But Peter addresses them as elect.  Publicly they would be of no account, despised, but he says "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ" chap 1:2.  The elect are persons who are the subject of divine, sovereign selection.  Though of no account publicly they were divinely selected.  That is our position today, not of much account publicly but elect according to the foreknowledge of God.  Elect, I understand, governs these three expressions; elect according to, by and unto.  "Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father" involves God's purpose; "by sanctification of the Spirit" means that these believers who had received the Holy Spirit were by that means sanctified, set apart for divine purposes; and "unto" is the objective; "unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ".  Peter goes on: "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to his great mercy, has begotten us again to a living hope... to an incorruptible and undefiled and unfading inheritance, reserved in the heavens for you".  They had no inheritance down here, they had had to leave their native land which meant so much to Jews, but they have a heavenly inheritance which they await.  It is not yet entered into in this setting, but they await this heavenly inheritance.  What a remarkable people they were!  They are poor, despised publicly, but what an inheritance they had!  Not all the wealth in this world could compare with a heavenly incorruptible and undefiled and unfading inheritance.  The apostle Peter would lift these believers up from their circumstances and occupy them with what was glorious, what belonged to them.  He goes on to speak about "Jesus Christ: whom, having not seen, ye love".  We have just sung a hymn of appreciation of our Lord Jesus Christ (No 54) and all of us entered into it.  We are together in the fact that we are "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ".  We have a heavenly inheritance, and Jesus Christ is the One whom, having not seen, we love.  It is a great moral triumph for God, that although we have never seen our Lord Jesus Christ, we love Him and we intend to be here for Him for His pleasure.
Peter goes on to speak about the Holy Spirit "sent from heaven".  He sets out these things before these believers, and we know these things.  We enter into these blessed realities: heavenly inheritance, love for our Lord Jesus Christ whom we have never seen.  Peter could not say that because he had seen Him, but he wrote to those who had never seen Him.  But we are going to see Him one day, see a blessed Man who has secured our affections.  Meantime there is the presence of the Holy Spirit here.
Now in the verses we have read Peter views these persons who have such great blessings as set together and therefore refers to "one another".  Thus we are greatly privileged to have one another, dear brethren.  That cannot be said about all who are faithful at the present moment.  There are individuals who are the only ones walking in the truth in some localities.  What a test that must be!  Do they not long and pray to have persons to walk with?  And there are some who have a few and they long for more, but many here are privileged to have a number to walk with.  Oh, what a favour it is!  The question is, do we fully appreciate one another, for while it is a great privilege, it is nevertheless also very testing.  We would not be without one another surely, but to work out things with one another is quite a challenge.  Peter says here "Having purified your souls by obedience to the truth to unfeigned brotherly love".  Mark the expressions!  "To unfeigned brotherly love, love one another out of a pure heart fervently".  This is a very simple exhortation but how important it is!  This is positive activity.  "To unfeigned brotherly love, love one another out of a pure heart fervently", has its own challenge to every one of us.  Were we all on this line we would get the best out of one another.  The fact is that we can so act that we can get the worst out of one another.  I have seen in our locality the worst coming out in persons through the lack of love.  But we can get the best out of one another where there is "unfeigned brotherly love".  We were speaking in the reading about mutuality.  These verses in Peter about one another do not come far short of what we had in the reading about the truth of the body.  Only Paul teaches as to the body, but Peter has his own way of bringing to bear the truth by way of exhortation.  So he exhorts: "Having purified your souls by obedience to the truth to unfeigned brotherly love, love one another out of a pure heart fervently; being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible".  Think of being born of incorruptible seed, born by the living and abiding word of God!  This is born morally from an incorruptible origin; it is birth morally, constitutionally; we thus belong to this distinguished family.  He exhorts them earlier as "children of obedience"; not only obedient children but "children of obedience", children that belong to the family of obedience.  "Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the living and abiding word of God".  He goes on to say "all flesh is as grass... but the word of the Lord abides for eternity".
Then he comes to certain ugly features.  He says "Laying aside therefore all malice and all guile and hypocrisies and envyings and all evil speakings".  Persons who are alone in a locality and have none to walk with have not the same occasion to give rise to these feelings.  These ugly features, dear brethren, relate to one another, because malice operates towards persons; there is no occasion to use guile if there is no other person.  And so as to hypocrisies, there is no opportunity to appear what we are not if there is nobody to appear to.  Envyings involve other persons.  The fact of the matter is, dear brethren, that a local company can be an area for the same ugly features to operate as in a political meeting or in a social club.  One of the plagues in Egypt was the plague of dog-flies, which might be like these ugly features that are found in the world.  At the introduction of that plague God made a separation, or deliverance or redemption, see note to Exod 8:23.  He made a separation that no dog-flies were in the land of Goshen where the children of Israel were.  These features are prevalent in the world today, they are characteristic of the world, but let us be on our guard because these same features can operate in our local settings.  Paul in both the epistle to the Colossians and the epistle to Ephesians warns against malice, which is the inward working of enmity, ill-feeling, that kind of thing.  Peter says here "Laying aside" these things; they are ready to operate, ready to take advantage of any opportunity.  They are to be definitely laid aside.  It says in Colossians "out off" these things, including malice (see chap 3:8), put off, and in Ephesians "Let" these features "be removed from you", chap 4:31.  They are ready to operate and cause disturbance, and militate against the functioning of the one body.  They are real dangers.  There is to be a separation as in the plague of the dog-flies.  There were no dog-flies among the people of God but there were in Egypt.  Let us be watchful dear brethren, for these ugly features are in every one of our hearts; I know they are in my heart.  If any say they are not in their hearts they do not know their own hearts because they are there and the enemy would use them to disturb.  "Laying aside therefore", Peter says, these features, "as new-born babes desire earnestly the pure mental milk of the word, that by it ye may grow up to salvation, if indeed ye have tasted that the Lord is good".  There is the positive, mental, milk of the word, what is pure, the pure mental milk of the word.  Let us be committed to what is pure, for the more we are committed to what is pure the less opportunity there is for these wrong feelings to arise towards one another.
Peter is concerned about conditions among believers, just as if he were here today, he would be concerned about conditions in our localities.  So he says in chapter 4, "the end of all things is drawn nigh: be sober therefore, and be watchful unto prayers; but before all things having fervent love among yourselves, because love covers a multitude of sins".  How many things could be covered if we had fervent love among ourselves.  Some things that come into public would not need to come into public were there "fervent love among yourselves, because love covers a multitude of sins".  Love would cover all that can possibly be righteously covered.  Somebody said that love covers confessed sins.  That would be true too, I suppose, but it is not put that way here.  Peter is stressing the great possibilities that can be realised by the operation of love.  "Love covers a multitude of sins", not a few sins but a multitude of sins.  I am just going over the scripture, it speaks for itself: "but before all things having fervent love among yourselves, because love covers a multitude of sins".  We were reading recently in Genesis 9 about Noah.  Ham saw what was unseemly and if he had covered it nobody else would have known about it.  But he told his two brothers outside; they covered Noah.  "Love covers a multitude of sins".  We need to explore how many things can be covered by love.  How many things can be righteously covered by love so that things are not exposed that do not need to be exposed.
Then he says "hospitable one to another, without murmuring".  Hospitable one to another.  We are exhorted elsewhere: "Be not forgetful of hospitality; for by it some have unawares entertained angels", Heb 13:1, 2.  We are to be hospitable to strangers, persons from a distance.  John also in his third epistle commends Gaius for what he had "wrought towards the brethren and that strangers", but this in Peter's epistle is "hospitable one to another".  This is hospitality locally, this is brethren locally, entertaining one another.  There is a certain disadvantage, I can see, if we see one another only at the meetings.  To meet at the meetings is good of course, but there is another line that can promote confidence and prevent distance coming in.  "Hospitable one to another, without murmuring".  We were speaking last night about Paul at Ephesus for three years, speaking publicly and in every house.  He must have visited households, not necessarily invited.  That is another side.  It used to be a feature when I was young that brothers would call at the home without being invited and just show interest like a shepherd.  Young people get to know a brother who visits in a way they could not in the meeting.  But this Peter speaks of is "hospitable one to another".  This is inviting one another to our homes, so that we enjoy the company of one another, besides what takes place in the meeting.  It is a preventive of distance coming in for we can come to meetings and take part and yet some distance can exist between us, but this is not so likely in the home.  In the home we get to close quarters, get to know one another, get to love one another.  In fact if any sense of distance comes in between brethren it is a good thing to invite to the home, to have a meal together, just to sit down together, to get the restoration of brotherly confidence if that has been lacking.  "Hospitable one to another, without murmuring".  I remember a time in our own city many years ago when there were difficulties and certain sides were taken, some thought one way and some another way and there was a kind of pitched battle when we came together, whereas much could have been done by being in homes with one another to get to understand one another.  This is of all importance, dear brethren.  It is not far removed from what we had in the reading; it is part of the practical working out of the truth of the one body.  I just say again "hospitable one to another, without murmuring"; then he says "each according as he has received a gift".  It is almost like "the working in its measure of each one part", @Ephesians 4:16.  "Each according as he has received a gift, ministering it to one another, as good stewards of the various grace of God".  It is very like Romans 12: "having different gifts", v 6.  It is all promoting what is good and profitable, good stewards who have something to give, "ministering it to one another".  Let us increasingly value one another, dear brethren.
In chapter 5 we have "Likewise ye younger, be subject to the elder", that is a very necessary and comely feature.  Then he says "all of you bind on humility"; he does not stop there but he says "bind on humility towards one another", towards one another; bind it on, "bind on humility".  This is most difficult; to keep humble is most difficult; it says bind it on towards one another.  We speak about self-judgment and how important it is!  The most difficult person to judge is oneself.  I might have a pretty fair judgment of my brethren but it is far more difficult to judge myself; it is the most difficult thing of all, to have a right judgment of self.  It may be a lifelong lesson to have a right judgment of self.  We tend to be lenient when judging self.  "All of you bind on humility towards one another; for God sets himself against the proud, but to the humble gives grace".  Humility, to quote, is not thinking little of self; true humility is not thinking of self at all.  How difficult that is!  "God sets himself against the proud" -- that is very serious -- "but to the humble gives grace.  Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in the due time; having cast all your care upon him, for he cares about you".  God does not only care for us, He cares about us, we mean something to Him.
Lastly we are exhorted to "Salute one another with a kiss of love".  That is a fine expression; "Salute one another" is a positive activity towards one another.  "Salute one another" involves respect for one another.  Paul writes "Salute one another with a holy kiss", @2 Corinthians 13:12.  Peter says "Salute one another with a kiss of love".  You will find in Mr Taylor's volumes a reading in Edinburgh entitled 'Local Assembly Administration' and there follows later in that volume an address he gave; 'A Holy Kiss', vol 43 p 280 & 380.  Actually the address took place first.  The address was given on the Wednesday evening on "Salute one another with a holy kiss", and the reading 'Local Assembly Administration' took place on the Thursday evening.  If we are going to have right administration, things done rightly amongst us for the pleasure of God, we need to salute one another with a kiss of love.  "Peace be with you all who are in Christ".
We have just gone over these exhortations, dear brethren.  It is what Peter would say to us; it may be what the Lord would say to us at the moment; it may be what is needed in our localities, the right value of one another, fervent love for one another.  In one sense all we have is one another.  We maintain separation which is really sanctification but we have one another.  Let us make the most of one another, let us get the best out of one another, let us love one another fervently, let us salute one another with a kiss of love.  May the Lord encourage us, for His Name's sake.
London
20th February 1982
{272}
SIX MEN OF FAITH
@Hebrews 11:32
I desire help to speak about these men who are mentioned here, to say a brief word about each one.  It is significant that the writer, whom we presume is Paul, should put these names together.  They are not given in historical order, but the writer has some purpose in mentioning them.  They were all leaders; leadership is a very needful feature in our time.  A leader among believers is not an outstanding personality who is able to carry all before him with natural ability.  Leadership is promoted in this world at the expense of others, whether in business or politics or military affairs.  In one sense, dear brethren, we are all leaders.  We all lead in some direction.  We all have a certain influence.  We are all persons who others imitate, whether for good or for what is not good.  I have to ask myself -- and let each one of us ask ourselves -- In what direction do I influence?  If all other believers followed the way I am on, would that be for good, and for the furtherance of the testimony?  Let each one here ask himself and herself -- Would the way I am on, if followed by others, promote the interests of our absent Lord until He comes?  That is a very challenging matter.  We all lead and influence in some direction; may we be concerned that any lead we may give or any influence we may have may be for the promotion of the interests of our absent Lord until He comes.
Young people are leaders.  Timothy was.  He was told by Paul, "Let no one despise thy youth" (1 Tim 4:12), so he must have been somewhat young, "but be a model of the believers" -- one such as others would follow for their spiritual profit.  Titus was also somewhat young and he was exhorted to afford himself "as a pattern of good works", Tit 2:7.  Now we all, each one of us, present some kind of pattern.  Young people, others will imitate you and what you do.  Let each one of us be concerned that the course we are on is such as others can imitate for their spiritual profit and for the promotion of the interests of our Lord.  Of course, some are more responsible to lead than others, but we all exert some kind of lead.  Let it be for good!
Having said that much about leaders, I want to speak about these men and to say a brief word about each one, and about one feature of each of them.  So we shall begin with Gideon.  Now the threat in Gideon's day was from the Midianites.  The Midianites are usually coupled with other nations, that is, they associate with others.  In Genesis 37 they are found along with the Ishmaelites; in Numbers 25 they are found along with the Moabites; in Judges 6 they are found along with Amalek.  The Midianites are persons who associate, and they are not discriminate as to those with whom they associate.  As believers we are to be discriminate as to those with whom we associate.  Wrong associations, dear brethren, bring about famine conditions.  The result of the Midianites' dominance was lack of food, famine conditions.  How was Gideon acting?  Was he in this association?  No, he was having his own links with God, filling out his own exercises.  As far as we know he was alone; he was threshing wheat in the winepress; he was following his own exercise.  If we want to be preserved from wrong associations and from party activity, or anything of this kind, let us have our own private exercises, our own links with God.  That was Gideon.
Now one feature of Gideon was this, he was reluctant to take a step without being assured of the Lord's approval.  Jehovah said to him, "I will certainly be with thee", Judg 6:16.  Did that give Gideon a free hand to do just what he liked and act as he thought fit?  No, it made him all the more dependent.  He said, "If now I have found favour in thine eyes, shew me a sign", Judg 6:17.  He does not want to take one step without being assured that the Lord is with him and is approving.  At a further stage he asks for another sign.  He wants to be sure.  He says, "Behold, I put a fleece of wool on the threshing-floor; if dew shall be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the ground..." (@Judges 6:37), and it was so.  Was that enough for him?  No, he wanted to be doubly sure, so he asked for another sign -- "Let it, I pray thee, be dry upon the fleece only, and upon all the ground let there be dew", Judg 6:39.  You see how dependent he was, how simple he was, how unlike some of us who take an action and then hope it will turn out all right.  We say something, maybe, and hope the results will be good.  But not Gideon.  He wanted to be assured that in every step he took he would have the Lord's approval and the Lord with him.  Now this feature is needed by believers at the present moment, that we should have our own links with the Lord, be free from any party activity and wrong associations, and be assured of the Lord's approval in the steps we take.
And then we have Barak.  The difficulty in Barak's day came from Jabin king of Canaan, who reigned in Hazor, see Judg 4.  Another Jabin, king of Hazor, had been overcome by Joshua in the previous book.  And here they come again, with Sisera and chariots of iron, in a great offensive against the children of Israel.  This kind of thing happens in the history of the testimony; exercises that have been faced previously recur.  There are two matters, dear brethren, which have been a concern to godly brethren right from the beginning of the recovery, one is the 'open' principle, the other is worldliness.  Mr Darby had to face the open principle and was concerned about the creeping in of worldliness in his time.  These two features come in again and again.  Every generation has to face them.  How does Barak act?  He is a man who takes responsibility, though reluctant to do so.  The initiative does not come from Barak; it comes from a woman, a prophetess -- it comes, you might say, from the underlying godly concern on the part of the body of the saints.  There is an underlying body of concern as to these two features I have spoken about at the present time.  The responsibility was laid on Barak and eventually he took it up.
Taking on responsibility is needed when features like openness and worldliness are evident in our localities.  Are they allowed to go on without any banner being raised against them?  It is not right, brethren.  It needs persons to take responsibility that these matters are faced and are overcome and do not dominate in our localities, because the enemy is continually busy.  Each generation since the beginning of the recovery has had to face these features and we have to face them in our time.  Let us face them, dear brethren.  Let us take responsibility in our localities that these features of openness and worldliness do not overcome us but are faced and brethren helped and strengthened to overcome them.
Now we come to Samson.  The threat in his day was the Philistine, that is, the will of man and the mind of man in the things of God.  Many things could be said about Samson which would not be too commendable, but one feature I would like to stress is what he came to at the end of his life.  You might say it took him a long time to come to it, but he came to something in the way of dependence on God.  He came to a sense of his own helplessness, that power must come from God.  Oh how needful this is in dealing with the will of man and the mind of man.  The will of man and the mind of man would operate in every one of us if we gave way.  The antidote to the will of man and the mind of man is the will of God and the mind of Christ.  We need to be committed to these two blessed features and we have the wherewithal in having the Spirit.  Samson was a man of great exploits, but I am not going to speak about his exploits.  The Spirit of God came upon him and he certainly did some great things, some wonderful things, but the end of his life corresponds with the day in which we are, that is, he was humbled.  He gave away the very secret of his life.  He was tempted; he was under the influence of the Philistine woman and she gradually acted so that he lost his power.  Poor man! he rose up as he had done before and thought he would act as at other times, but he had lost his power, see Judg 16:20.
Dear brethren, we are under reproach, as Samson was.  Samson was under reproach through his own fault, and much of the reproach that attaches to us publicly at the present time is because of our own fault, our own wrongdoing.  It is not all the reproach of Christ -- thank God there is some of the reproach of Christ -- but some is reproach that we have brought on ourselves just as Samson did so that he was made sport of by the Philistines.  Then it says, "But the hair of his head began to grow", Judg 16:22.  Unnoticed, his hair began to grow.  He could no longer speak about the seven locks of his head as he did earlier, but his hair began to grow.  It was a sign of life.  What we need, dear brethren, is the evidence of life.  It was a small beginning with Samson, unnoticed by the Philistines, but his hair began to grow; life was coming in.  Then he prayed.  Twice Samson prayed in his life, once when he was faint after a great victory in chapter 15 and now in chapter 16.  He prayed and said, "Lord Jehovah, remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God", Judg 16:28.  Oh how earnest he is, how dependent he is!  How we need to be like this, dear brethren.  If we are not the humblest believers in Christendom, we have not learned anything.  Samson was humbled and he was completely dependent on God.  He realised he had no power of his own.  He could go previously in power and overcome the Philistines and all concerned, but here he is in humbling circumstances, and that is how we are.
Let us accept the humbling and keep humble.  It is difficult to keep humble.  Even Paul, after he had been caught up to the third heaven, needed something additional to keep him humble.  There were other things that kept him humble and one was the memory of the wrong he had done to the people of God, but after being in the third heaven he required an additional thorn for the flesh to keep him humble.  We so tend to be elated.  We may well keep humble because of the reproach we have brought on ourselves.  Also, certain matters continue unsettled.  I think the Lord is bent on keeping us humble.  If we had every matter settled, we might be a little more like Laodicea again, but Samson was a humble, dependent man, and in that way he met the Philistine.  Let us be devoted to the will of God, and concerned to have the mind of Christ.  Actually, the final victory Samson secured was greater than all the earlier exploits in his life.  There are features we see in these men that the Lord would help us to be formed in.
And so we come to Jephthah.  The opposition in Jephthah's day came from the children of Ammon.  It is interesting that they are not so often called Ammonites, they are usually called the children of Ammon.  Even when Ammon and Moab were born it says that Moab was the father of the Moabites, but it says that Ammon was the father of the children of Ammon, Gen 19:38.  You will find that through nearly all the references to that nation it is "the children of Ammon".  It is a rival family.  It is another family.  It corresponds to the influence of what is natural, a deadly influence.  What is natural, of course, has its place, it is ordained of God just as the territory of the children of Ammon is recognised in Deuteronomy 2:19, but the dominance of it will do damage.  In the chapter in Judges which refers to Jephthah you will find the children of Ammon and also the children of Israel.  The children of Israel would represent the family of God; the children of Ammon would represent the natural side, and the children of Ammon were claiming the territory of Israel.  Later, in king Saul's time, the king of the children of Ammon wanted to put out the right eyes of the men of Israel, see 1 Sam 11:2.  That natural family influence would cause us not to have full vision, not to see things as they really are; it would be a reproach on the children of Israel.  Later, in David's time, when David sent a message of grace to the king of the children of Ammon, as he is called there (see 2 Sam 10), they despised the spirit of grace and cut off half the beards and certain parts of the clothes of the messengers; they made them objects of ridicule.  The influence of what is natural is baneful if it is dominant; it has its place, as I have said, but when it becomes dominant, as it was in Jephthah's time, it represents a serious threat indeed.
Now the feature seen in Jephthah is this, that he sees the issue, he sees clearly what the issue is, which is a very necessary feature.  The children of Ammon were claiming divine territory and Jephthah sets out clearly the facts and the principles bearing on the matter.  He sees clearly and presents clearly, indisputably, what the issue is.  Oh, this is a very important feature to have with us.  Very often issues are confused, but Jephthah was not confused.  Other things could be said about Jephthah that were not too commendable, but this feature showed he was a man of faith.  He knew the history; he could go over it all; he presented the facts, as I have said, and the principles bearing on it.  He was definite, and carried the brethren with him.  That was Jephthah.  You can see the importance of these features.  He was the means of overcoming the children of Ammon.
I am only referring briefly to one feature of each of these men and so we come to David, and, of course, much could be said about David, such a man of parts as he was.  He was a warrior.  He was a shepherd.  He was a psalmist.  He was a musician.  He was a king.  How many things could be said about David!  I want to speak about one feature in regard to David and that is this, that when David went wrong, he knew how to repent.  That is a very important feature.  We have @Psalm 51 which shows how deeply David repented, a psalm that will no doubt be used by a godly remnant in a coming day to express their feelings.  David expressed them in his day.  Oh how deeply he repented of the sin he had committed!  In fact, the sin that he in his lust delighted in, he went over in the presence of God and said, "For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is continually before me", @Psalm 51:3.  He went over it all in the presence of God and saw it all in a different light altogether.  He saw his sin as God saw it, and that brought about the depth of his repentance.  How important it is!  We all go off the track sometimes.  Do we know how to judge ourselves, dear brethren?  David knew how to judge himself.  Do we just gloss over things, and make excuses for ourselves?  David did not do that.  He went into the matter in depth, the depth of repentance.
Not only does David show us how to repent, but he also was ready to be adjusted.  That is another feature that marked David.  He was prepared to be adjusted by Jehovah, prepared to be adjusted by Nathan, by Gad the seer, and not only by these men of worth.  David was even ready to accept adjustment from a man like Joab, an unspiritual man.  The need to accept adjustment is a very important feature in the believer for without it we could often go on in independence.  Even difficulties in localities can continue because there is not a readiness to be adjusted, but instead an adamant attitude can be maintained.  May we all be ready to be adjusted when this is necessary.
Lastly we have Samuel, who was the result of his mother's exercises, and who as a boy was clothed in a linen ephod and committed to the Lord's interests.  There is no doubt the Lord helps those who commit themselves when they are young.  Samuel became a seer, a prophet, and a judge.  He was with God in His feelings regarding the people and he counted it a sin not to pray to God for the people.  In some chapters of 1 Samuel he is not mentioned; he is with God in secret all the time and in reserve to be available when needed.  He had his locality and his circuit of service and was found among a company of prophets in chapter 19.  He represents consistency in relations with God and reliability as a result.  May we all desire to be thus faithful to the Lord and reliable in His testimony.
"The prophets" are mentioned at the end of the verse read.  Much could be said about them, but I trust sufficient has been said about the six men who are named to stimulate us all to have an active part in the testimony of our Lord in our day.
Glasgow
28th August 1982
{279}
"THE PROVING OF YOUR FAITH"
@1 Peter 1:7,8 (to "love")
It is in mind to say a few words about faith because faith is tested at this moment considering what has happened among us.  The Lord appreciates faith, appreciates persons here who have faith.  Faith believes and trusts.  It would be a challenge to us; can we trust the One who has taken a little one from a household where he was loved?  Can we trust Him without seeing, knowing that His way is best (Hymn 335)?  We are in the time of the proving of our faith.  We need to be assured in the first place that this beloved child's eternal welfare is assured.  The Lord coming into manhood and going into death and rising again, secures the eternal welfare of little children.  Matthew 18 would teach us that, the Lord Himself said, "For the Son of man has come to save that which was lost", @Matthew 18:11.  He did not require to seek little children.  He said elsewhere, "for the Son of man has come to seek and to save that which is lost", @Luke 19:10.  We, dear brethren, who have come to years of responsibility had to be sought, the Lord sought us, but He did not require to seek this little child.  His work avails for little children such as this one.  We need to be assured of that.  That same chapter tells us that their angels, the angels of little children, "continually behold the face of my Father who is in the heavens" (@Matthew 18:10), which indicates God's interest in little children.  It says, too, in that chapter, "it is not the will of your Father who is in the heavens that one of these little ones should perish", @Matthew 18:11.  We may be assured, therefore, that no one of these little ones will perish.  That is truth which would be light in our souls at this moment.
The Lord does not explain what He does; if He gave us explanation there would not be the same need for faith; but the Lord does not explain His movements.  He acts among us, and sometimes His actions result in sorrow, deep sorrow; but what the Lord appreciates is faith, faith in each one of us, in the parents here, in the relatives, in the local brethren.  Does the Lord see faith?  This is the time of the proving of our faith.  Peter was one himself who understood the Lord's appreciation of faith.  The Lord said to him, "I have besought for thee that thy faith fail not", @Luke 22:32.  Peter failed, but the Lord interceded that his faith would not fail.  We may count on the Lord's intercession at this very moment, beloved brethren, that our faith should not fail, that we should be strong in faith, as Peter himself said, "stedfast in faith", @1 Peter 5:9.
In the previous verse we read, "put to grief by various trials".  The Lord's people go through a great variety of trials, and this is a very severe grief, "put to grief by various trials, that the proving of your faith...".  The believer's sojourn here is the time of the proving of his faith; faith is proved by being sustained in such sorrowful circumstances --  "the proving of your faith, much more precious than of gold which perishes, though it be proved by fire".  Gold is proved by fire, but in comparison with faith gold perishes; faith does not perish.  Gold is proved by fire, and the proving of faith is by being put to grief by various trials.  This is a time of the proving, and this is what affords such pleasure to the Lord as He looks down.  He does not explain His movements but finds believers accepting them, trusting Him, trusting the One who has so acted, because the taking of this child is the Lord's own action.  Oh to be strong in faith, not only for our support, but for the pleasure of God.  God has pleasure in proving our faith, and seeing the faith of the believer enduring such circumstances.
So it says, "be found to praise and glory and honour in the revelation of Jesus Christ".  That is future, the meantime is the time of "the proving of your faith", but in the future it is going to be found to praise and glory and honour.  This is not the time for praise and glory and honour, it is the time for the proving of our faith.  But as sure as this is the time of the proving of our faith, so in the revelation of Jesus Christ there is going to be found praise and glory and honour.  That is our great hope, beloved brethren, in the revelation of Jesus Christ.  It says, "whom, having not seen, ye love"; that is faith.  We have never seen the Lord Jesus; we are going to see Him one day, but we have never yet seen Him.  Peter had seen Him, therefore he could not say, 'whom having not seen, we love', but he says; "whom, having not seen, ye love".  This is the time of faith; the Lord Himself said, "blessed they who have not seen and have believed", John 20:29.  Oh the time of faith, the proving of our faith, how important it is!  So it says, "whom, having not seen, ye love"; it is like love with faith.  Paul speaks in the last two verses of the Epistle to the Ephesians of "love with faith", which is a beautiful combination.  "Peace to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.  Grace with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption"
May we all be supported and strengthened in this time when our faith is tested; faith endures such testings; it is the time of the proving of our faith.  May it be so for the Lord's own pleasure.
Kirkcaldy
7th October 1982
At a burial meeting for an infant
{282}
"WHATEVER HE MAY SAY TO YOU, DO"
@John 2:1-12
It is very encouraging to be reminded that the Lord, as our brother has said, does not change.  He is always available to help, and to lead; there is never any lack with Him.  But there is need that we should be available to Him that He should have His way with us.
What impressed me was the expression at the end of verse 10, "Thou hast kept the good wine till now".  That is what the feast-master said to the bridegroom; however, the feast-master was not in the secret of how the good wine became available, but the servants knew.  The feast-master said to the bridegroom, "Every man sets on first the good wine, and when men have well drunk, then the inferior".  That is what men do; when things come into the hands of men there is bound to be deterioration, but "thou hast kept the good wine till now".  The feast-master credited the bridegroom with this, but the servants knew that it was the Lord who had produced the good wine.  The feast-master had taste; he was able to discern that the good wine had become available, but he was not in the secret of how it came.
There are different characters in this passage: the bridegroom, the feast-master, the mother of Jesus, the servants, and others invited.  It says, "And Jesus also, and his disciples, were invited" -- Jesus also.  He was a kind of after-thought.  Certain arrangements were made and then Jesus also, and the disciples, were invited; that is, the Lord Jesus was not given His right place; He was not in control; others were in control, and Jesus was added.  It is no wonder therefore that the wine became deficient.  Arrangements were made by men and the Lord was a kind of appendage.  This has happened in the history of the testimony; we know this kind of thing; men arranging things, not under the control of the Lord.
There is what is religious in the arrangements, and what is of nature in the mother of Jesus, and she intervenes; but the Lord adjusts her and she accepts the adjustment and gives a good word, "Whatever he may say to you, do".  'Whatever He may say', she said to the servants.  Of all the persons at this wedding-feast the servants would be of the least value; they would not be prominent -- they were behind the scenes somewhere, but they were available to fulfil the Lord's word.  Whatever He said, they did.  This is how recovery takes place, when the Lord gets His rightful place.  There is no indication that the feast-master gave Him His rightful place, nor the bridegroom.  Both the feast-master and the bridegroom held official positions, but the servants had no official position; they were merely servants; they would be regarded as of the least account in all this gathering, but they would represent, in principle, what the Lord said in John.14:21, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me".  They would also represent those who kept His word and so fulfilled what the Lord said.
Six stone water-vessels were standing there; they did not have to be fetched, they were just available on the spot.  The servants and the water-vessels would represent one thing, in a sense.  "Jesus says to them, Fill the water-vessels with water.  And they filled them up to the brim".  If we are to know times of help and blessing, we have to fulfil, in a full way, the Lord's word.  The servants filled the vessels up to the brim; there is no room for anything else.  This would indicate full devotion to the will of the Lord.  It is not half measure; it is not something of the Lord's mind and something of my mind; there is no mixture here, "They filled them up to the brim".  It is like the principle of consecration.  Consecration in Leviticus 8 means literally 'filling of hand'.  When Aaron and his sons were consecrated, their hands were full; there was no room for anything else; that is like the servants here and the vessels, there is nothing before them but the fulfilling of what the Lord indicated.
Then the Lord said, "Draw out now", and the good wine was there.  Everything that men set on, even with good intentions, will become deficient; but when the Lord takes control there is no inferiority, no deficiency; "Thou hast kept the good wine till now".  I know that was said to the bridegroom, but he had nothing to do with it.  It came to pass under the Lord's complete control.  Wine was spoken of in Jotham's parable as that which cheers God and man (Judges 9:13), so that it is for the pleasure of God and our own blessing.  The good wine would be what stimulates and encourages us, and this is made available.  The servants and the water-vessels were the means by which this wine became available as fulfilling the Lord's word.  Others partake of it; it was not for the servants only; thus good wine is available.
In spite of public confusion, in spite of the history of things in which we have been involved, the good wine is being drawn out now.  Would the ministry the Lord is giving be inferior to what He gave in previous years?  I do not think so.  I think what the Lord is giving now in ministry can be spoken of as good wine; evidence of the word of God coming to us in our localities would answer to the good wine.  It has been kept by the Lord to encourage and stimulate, and for the pleasure of God.  It comes about through the acknowledgment of the Lord in His rightful place.  The Lord is able for the initiative.  At the beginning of the incident the Lord did not have the initiative; others had the initiative, whoever they were, and the result was deficiency.  We have known that.  The great need now is to recognise the Lord's initiative and be fully committed to it, filled up to the brim, and we will continue to experience the drawing out of the good wine.
This becomes the means of Jesus manifesting His glory.  If the Lord speaks to us in encouragement it is because of what He has done.  We have set nothing on; He has set things on.  It becomes a means of the manifestation of His glory; it causes Him to be glorified.  The feast-master would have glorified the bridegroom; the feast-master still had men before him; he was not in the secret; the servants were.  Jesus manifested His glory; any feature of recovery we enjoy becomes a manifestation of His glory, "And his disciples believed on him".
It says in verse 12, "After this he descended to Capernaum, he and his mother and his brethren and his disciples; and there they abode not many days".  He is leading now, and they are following.  They are kept together in following Him, it is not like verse 2, 'And Jesus also, and His disciples...', but, "he and his mother and his brethren and his disciples..." related to Him.  In the beginning of the incident those who made the arrangements expected that the Lord would be related to them, but the great need is for us to be related to Him.  May we be encouraged and helped to continue, giving Him His rightful place, for the manifestation of His glory, for His Name's sake.
Valence
15th February 1983
{285}
THE LORD'S PERSONAL INTEREST AND LOVE
@Luke 24:15; @John 11:3
I recall that our brother whom the Lord has just taken read this verse in Luke 24 in very similar circumstances not so long ago.  He pointed out that the conversing and reasoning of the two persons in this chapter were because they were bereaved and somewhat bewildered, and he suggested that there might be reasoning with some regarding why the Lord had taken to Himself a brother devoted to Him and His work, whom we would have thought was much needed; but he emphasised that "Jesus himself drawing nigh, went with them".  I desire to add now that these two persons who were bereaved and somewhat bewildered were the subjects of the personal interest of the Lord Jesus; "Jesus himself drawing nigh, went with them".
Not only were these persons the subjects of the Lord's personal interest, but the Lord desired that they should be conscious of being the subjects of His own personal interest.  It is a great comfort, dear friends, to be conscious of the personal interest of One so great as our Lord Jesus Christ.  Those who believe on Him are the subjects of the personal interest of "Jesus himself".  From verse 18 to verse 24 the Lord listened to them as they poured out their feelings to Him.  What they said was somewhat mixed, but the Lord listened to them, "went with them".  Because they were the subjects of His own personal interest, Jesus Himself listened.  Then in verses 25, 26 and 27, they listened to Him.  The Lord will listen to us.  He will enter into our inmost feelings about things, and then He has something to say, and there is comfort in listening to Him.
Among other things, He "interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself", @Luke 24:27.  The comfort is in the things concerning Himself.  What is natural ends in death.  Links so precious, which are of God, end in death, nevermore to be taken up again; but there is comfort in listening to the things concerning Himself.  Jesus Himself is the antecedent in all these verses which follow, Jesus Himself, in the intimacy which He would desire to have with each one of us.
So at this moment we can think of those who sorrow most and we can say that they are the subjects of the Lord's own personal interest.  Our brother was the subject of the Lord's own personal interest; not only was but is.  His interest in our brother goes on into eternity; it never ceases.  It is because of His interest in him that He has taken him to be with Himself.
Now in John 11 there was a family who were the subjects of the Lord's own personal love and these persons were conscious of being loved by Him.  There is nothing more comforting, dear friends, than to realise that we are the subjects of the Lord's own personal affection.  Lazarus was sick and his sisters sent to the Lord saying, "Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick".  They knew Him and trusted Him, and they could count on His personal love.  How John writes these verses is very interesting -- "There was a certain man sick, Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of Mary and Martha her sister.  It was the Mary who anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick", John 11:1, 2.  But then in verse 5 it says, "Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus".  Each one was the subject of the Lord's own, personal affection.  Mary is mentioned first and she is commended for what she did outstandingly in response to the Lord Jesus personally; but in verse 5, Martha is mentioned first.  They sent to the Lord, saying, "he whom thou lovest is sick".  I commend especially to those who sorrow most at this time that there is blessed comfort in knowing that each is the subject of the Lord's own personal affection.
The apostle Paul could speak of One who had loved him and had given Himself for him, and we who trust in our Lord Jesus and His finished work can all take that ground.  I need not say that our brother was loved and was no doubt conscious of being the subject of the Lord's own personal affection.  If there was one thing that marked our brother it is that he was loved.  He had a place in our hearts.  The very fact that so many are here today would be a witness to the fact that he was much loved by those who knew him; but he was loved most of all -- and is loved most of all -- by the Lord Jesus Christ Himself.  May the sense of being the subjects of the Lord's own personal interest, and the sense of being the subjects of the Lord's own personal love, comfort every heart.
Aberdeen
23rd March 1983
At a burial meeting
{287}
THE LORD'S DIRECTION
@John 4:34-38; @John 6:10-13; @John 13:33-35; @John 20:21-23; @John 21:5,6 (to "find")
It would not be necessary to emphasise in a company like this that the apostle John writes for the day in which we are -- the Lord reserved John in view of writing suited to the end of the dispensation.  Peter and John are mentioned at the beginning of the Acts and Peter was prominent there.  John was held in reserve in view of his ministry for our own time, therefore John's gospel is a very interesting one.  John presents the Lord Jesus as doing things Himself.  Look over the gospel carefully and you will see that the Lord commits very little to the disciples in John.  Other gospels record the Lord sending out the twelve, and He instructed and commanded them.  Matthew 10 is a whole chapter committed to the instructions the Lord gave to the twelve when they were sent out.  John does not give us any such description.  Luke records the Lord sending out the seventy, and again He commands them and instructs them: John does not mention anything of that kind.  Other gospels tell us that the Lord sent two of His disciples to get the colt; John records that the Lord Himself found the colt -- other gospels record that the Lord sent two of His disciples to prepare the passover; John records no such thing.  If John wrote for the time in which we are, it is significant that he does not record these things.
I have read of some of the directions the Lord gives to His disciples.  I do not pretend to have exhausted that subject, there may be some others, but there are not many.  The Lord does not give much in the way of commission to His disciples in this gospel.  That is significant.  I believe, dear brethren, we are living in a time when the Lord is doing things Himself.  It might help us to arrive at that and look for what the Lord is doing, not necessarily to be too busy ourselves.  The Lord since He rose from the dead has never relinquished the initiative, and in our time He has a certain initiative which we need to recognise, and at least desire to be with Him in what He is doing.
In this first scripture the Lord says, "My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me, and that I should finish his work".  He says, "My food"; He does not say, 'My will'; He does not say, 'My mind'.  Think of the Lord feeding on doing the will of Him that had sent Him.  Think of the devotion of our Lord Jesus Christ; what food for our souls!  That was His food.  The disciples said, "Rabbi, eat" (John 4:31); they had been away into the city to buy provisions; they missed something.  They went off -- I do not think under the Lord's direction.  I do not think the Lord would have directed twelve of them to go to buy food, one or two might have done it; they were therefore on some kind of expedition of their own choosing.  If you had met them, they would say, 'We are the Lord's servants, on the Lord's business', but were they under His direction?  This would be a challenge to us all.  Meantime the Lord was in conversation with a woman, with a soul.  The Lord was doing something but the disciples were not in it; they were ignorant of what was happening.  We can be like that.
It says, "And upon this came his disciples, and wondered that he spoke with a woman", John 4:27.  They did not expect the Lord to speak to a woman; they would have expected the Lord, of course, to speak to them, but to a woman they did not expect.  They missed this, and we too can miss what the Lord is doing at the present time, because the Lord is working, there is no doubt about it.  The Lord is operating in view of His coming for His own.  The disciples wondered that He spoke with a woman; "yet no one said, What seekest thou? or, Why speakest thou with her?"  They were not sufficiently interested to enquire as to what they were missing.  Then they are concerned about the Lord eating, "Rabbi, eat"; and the Lord says, "My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me, and that I should finish his work.  Do not ye say, that there are yet four months and the harvest comes?"  They went away to buy food, as if to say, 'There is plenty of time; four months to harvest; we can take it easy; we can take our time'.  The Lord says, "Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest", and that is the situation now, dear brethren.  It is not a question of waiting for something to happen, or waiting for a more opportune moment, the fields are ready to harvest.
This reminds me of the ministry we had in London recently as to the extensive operations of the Lord at the present time.  How we need to have our hearts enlarged as to what He is doing, and to look for evidence of what He is doing with persons at the present time.  "Lift up your eyes".  He says, "Do not ye say, that there are yet four months and the harvest comes? … Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest".  That is the situation at the moment; the Lord is operating, in fact the great harvest, the Lord coming for all His own, is imminent.  What a harvest that will be when all the dead in Christ from Abel onwards (the first to die, as far as we know, was Abel) are raised.  What a harvest there is going to be, and it is about to take place; the Lord's coming is imminent.
The Lord here does not make too much of the disciples; it is not intended that there should be too much made of any one of us; there is only One to be exalted and that is the Lord Himself.  He says, "I have sent you to reap that on which ye have not laboured; others have laboured".  Is that not true at the present time?  Have not others laboured, those that have gone before us, have they not laboured?  "Others have laboured; and ye have entered into their labours".  Let us appreciate, and benefit from, these labours; let us be available to do what He indicates in the moment in which we are.  This would apply to young as well as old.  When I was young I used to think there was plenty of time, and I always intended eventually to commit myself to the Lord in a full way.  Every believer intends to do that; he would not be a real believer if he did not; but the tendency is to have other interests.  But there is a great advantage in committing ourselves when we are young.  This is the time; already the fields are white to harvest; let us be committed to the Lord Jesus and His interests down here.
Chapter 6 provides one of the few instances where the Lord gives directions to His disciples in John's gospel.  In chapter 4 the Lord requested of the woman.  He gave instructions to the man in John 9 and to persons around the grave of Lazarus in chapter 11, but not much is given to the disciples to do.  It is all in view of the glorifying of our Lord Jesus Christ.  In the other gospels the Lord is said to allow the disciples to distribute the food, but not here; He does it Himself; what He does allow the disciples to do is make the men sit down.  This is a word for us too, "Make the men sit down"; to have relaxed conditions, not to contemplate crisis conditions.  There was a crisis here, five thousand men to be fed; there are many crises in John's gospel and they increase in intensity, but what comes to light is that there is only One who can meet each crisis, only One.  Have we not experienced that in recent years?  No one that I know of has come out of any conflict with any credit, it has all been for the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So here He says to them, "Make the men sit down".  We can do that, dear brethren; we can contribute to a relaxed atmosphere in our gatherings; we can contribute to a normal order of things; these people sat down in an orderly way.  The disciples were permitted to do that, it was a command, "Make the men sit down", and then the Lord operates; He only can meet the situation.  Andrew did not have anything and Philip did not have anything, and Peter had nothing, but there was a little boy.  Andrew says, "There is a little boy here who has five barley loaves and two small fishes" (John 6:9), and the Lord uses what the little boy had; but the disciples were to make the men sit down.  What do we need in all our gatherings, in our care meetings?
Do we not need to make the men sit down, so that there is an orderly condition for the Lord to operate, to show His mind?  The Lord came into the situation fully, and then He says, "Gather together the fragments which are over and above, that nothing may be lost".  They are commanded to do it; they are commanded to make the men sit down, and they are commanded to gather together the fragments which are over and above.  They filled twelve hand-baskets.
You can understand these disciples filling the baskets, and every basket they filled they would be worshipping the One who had come into the situation; they would be glorifying the Lord Jesus Christ in relation to every basket they filled; they would say, Another basket!  If the Lord comes into the matter not only are matters settled, but there is spoil for His glory.  How necessary it is that we should at least desire to make room for the Lord to come into every situation that occurs in our localities.  The Lord may bring us to realise that we are not able for a certain situation; it is too much for us; such a situation has existed for many years, known to all of us; we may need to make way for the Lord to come in, and not only will the matter be settled, but there will be spoil.  The twelve hand-baskets were like spoil from the whole occasion; they contributed to the glory of the One who so operated, our Lord Jesus Christ.
In chapter 13 there is another word that the Lord gives the disciples.  He does not ask them to do great exploits.  He says, "A new commandment I give to you, that ye love one another".  It was a new commandment because they were going to find themselves in new circumstances.  They had always been accustomed to the Lord being with them; He loved them, His love kept them together; His love was sufficient for every situation when He was here with them, but He is going away, He is going to leave them, and His word to them is, "A new commandment I give to you, that ye love one another; as I have loved you".  I need not make much comment about that, but you can see the importance of it in the absence of our Lord Jesus Christ, the need for loving one another "as I have loved you".  They had proved His love, how in every situation He had come in and helped them, and now all they would have, in one sense, was one another; they would no longer have the Lord with them as He had been with them, but they were to love one another -- "as I have loved you, that ye also love one another".  It is the feet-washing chapter; He said earlier, "ye also ought to wash one another's feet" (John 13:14); this positive, practical service needs to be rendered to one another, to wash one another's feet, to refresh one another, and love one another.  This would have its own appeal to our hearts at the moment.
Now in chapter 20 the Lord sends them out.  John does not record a sending previously, as other evangelists do, but he records this sending out, "Peace be to you: as the Father sent me forth, I also send you".  "As the Father sent me forth"; think of the Lord Jesus being sent forth, as being with the Father, sent forth from with the Father.  Paul tells us in Galatians that "when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son" (@Galatians 4:4), sent Him forth from the communion that He enjoyed with Him personally.  That scripture speaks about the Spirit being sent out, that is the width, the scope, of the Spirit's activities; but He sent forth His Son; "as the Father sent me forth, I also send you.  And having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit: whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained".  They are trusted persons, but before He says, "whose soever sins ye remit", and so on, He breathed into them saying, "Receive the Holy Spirit"; it is persons who are animated by His breath who can be trusted with any administration, with any acting for Him during the time of His absence; it is only thus that the Lord could trust us.
Things come into our hands in the time of the Lord's absence; it is a very solemn consideration that things in our localities are in our hands and the Lord's interests can prosper in our hands or otherwise.  Dare we undertake for the Lord unless we are animated by His breath?  They are sent forth as He was sent forth, and He commits things into their hands, but He breathes into them; that is, all they undertake is to be in the breath of the ascending heavenly Man.  We have His breath by having the Spirit because the Spirit of God is also called the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of Jesus, the Spirit of Jesus Christ, the Spirit of God's Son.  We have His breath, we have the wherewithal, as receiving the Spirit, to act for the Lord in the time of His absence, to do things just as He would do them if He were here.  But the question would be whether we always act as animated by the breath of Jesus.  How important this is!  They are sent forth, they are commissioned to be like ambassadors for the absent Lord, but let us remember, dear brethren, that what is needed is His breath.  His Spirit, to animate us and to govern our motives in all that is done in His name in the time of His absence.
Now in chapter 21 the disciples, at least some of them, had gone off in their own independent way; they were not acting in the breath of Jesus; that is obvious.  So where we began to read the Lord says to them, "Children, have ye anything to eat?", and that word, "children", means 'little children'; it is not the same word as "children" in chapter 13; it is the diminutive; it is the same word as John uses for the little children in his family.  The Lord is saying, 'Little children, have ye anything to eat?'  Who is He addressing?  He is addressing the very persons He spoke of to the Father in chapter 17 as "the men whom thou gavest me".  In the divine mind they were men, but they were acting like little children, and we can be like that.  While men in the divine mind, in divine purpose, we can act like little children.  There is a mild rebuke in what the Lord says here, "Children".  There was also tenderness in it.  We have all been involved in this kind of thing, but the Lord said, "Have ye anything to eat?"; the Lord is concerned about food.  As we said in the reading, we have light, but there is a great need of food.  There is great need to feed individually, and to feed one another, to feed the brethren in our localities, to feed the young people.  What was the commission to Peter?  "Feed my lambs" and "Shepherd my sheep".  Shepherding would involve feeding and also teaching; I believe we have something of teaching, but there is a need of food, "Feed my lambs", "Shepherd my sheep", and "Feed my sheep".  This is a great food chapter.
So He says, 'Little children, have ye anything to eat?'  What do they say?  'No'.  Their independent move had been fruitless.  The Lord gives them instructions, "Cast the net at the right side of the ship and ye will find".  They are now acting under the Lord's direction.  What I am somewhat labouring to get at is this, that we should be on the outlook for what the Lord is indicating, to make room for what the Lord has in mind; not to have too much in mind ourselves but to be on the outlook for what the Lord is indicating.  So He says here (they do not know who is speaking, they do not yet know it is the Lord), "Cast the net at the right side of the ship and ye will find"; they acted under the Lord's instructions and there was a great result.  So the Lord says to them, "Bring of the fishes which ye have now taken"; taken under His direction.  They are now in the place of contributors; they had answered Him, 'No'; nothing to eat, but under His direction it is now, "Bring of the fishes which ye have now taken".  They saw a fire of coals there and fish laid on it, and bread; the Lord had the food supply, but He allowed them to contribute to this food supply as they acted under His direction.
How important it is, dear brethren.  We all tend to do things and say things and afterwards endeavour to justify what we have done or what we have said; but that is the wrong way round, that is surely the wrong way round.  The Lord would have us act and speak under His direction.  I know it is a high level; we have to overcome much to get into this line, but it is what the Lord would say to us, I am sure, in the time in which we are now at the end of this dispensation.  It is John's message for us from his gospel, from one point of view; to be sensitive, to be exercised, to see where the Lord is and what He is doing and what He is indicating.  So He says, as we well know, "Come and dine".  How full is the Lord's provision!
I have said enough, dear brethren; I trust it is acceptable; I trust we will all benefit, for the Lord's pleasure and glory; not for our glory, but for His glory, for His name's sake.
Dorking
9th July 1983
{294}
"THE GOOD PART"
@Luke 10:38-42; @Matthew 11:25-30; @John 12:23-26; @John 13:21-25
At the end of our reading the question was raised as to how our state can be improved -- a very important question.  We have, of course, first of all to acknowledge that our state needs improvement.  The Spirit would help us; we are not to be over-occupied with the low state but rather with how it can be improved.
I would like to speak about the "good part".  We can be in the midst of a low state, crying to the Lord for help, and that is good for us, but there is another way.  We can be feeling conditions and cry to the Lord about them, but the other way is, we can be with the Lord viewing the conditions; that is where the Lord would have us be.  We are often concerned as to whether the Lord is with us, and I suppose many companies of believers think the Lord is with them, or try to believe the Lord is with them.  What is far more important is that we should be exercised to be with the Lord; He will not put obstacles in our way if we are really desirous of being with Him and viewing things as He views them.  It is open to every one of us.
I begin with this homely incident in Martha's house.  "He entered into a certain village; and a certain woman, Martha by name, received him into her house".  This was a house open to receive the Lord.  Martha was a good sister, she loved the Lord, opened her house to receive Him.  It says she "received him into her house".  We have had recent ministry on reception.  She received him into her house.  "And she had a sister called Mary".  Luke has his own way of writing.  He tells us that there was a manger available for the Babe Jesus before he tells us that there was no room in the inn.  He tells us in chapter 7 what that woman did before he tells us what Simon the Pharisee did not do.  He tells us here what Mary did before he tells us about Martha being distracted with much serving; and that is what the Lord would bring before us at this time, that we might be like Mary.  The Lord says "Mary has chosen the good part".  She chose this way; it was not laid upon her.  I do not think many of us choose this way.  Most of us are like Martha, let us accept it.  But Luke says "she had a sister called Mary, who also, having sat down at the feet of Jesus was listening to his word".  She was with the Lord, listening to Him.  I wonder what we know of this.  I trust we desire to know more of the good part that Mary chose.  Luke tells us what Mary did, Mary's attitude, and says that Martha was distracted.  Distracted from what?  Distracted from the good part that Mary chose.  I am afraid many of us become distracted.  Martha had a sense of responsibility; it was her house.  It is good to have a sense of responsibility, but Martha in her keen sense of responsibility was saying for herself, I must do something, I must be active.  Did it help the situation?  She was distracted.  Dear brethren, there is a better way, there is another way, and that is the good part that Mary chose.  I am afraid we often act as distracted from the good part that the Lord would have us fill, to be listening to Him, to take our directions from Him.  What has He in mind for us in our localities, the enjoyment of eternal life?  Maybe I can spoil that by my own sense of responsibility and feeling that I have to do something, have to be active.  We think, what can we do?  What can we organise to do something.  That is not the way.  Martha was distracted with much serving.  It was her house; she felt, I have to do something, I take on this responsibility, what can I do?  But she was distracted from the good part that Mary chose.  "Martha was distracted with much serving, and coming up she said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone?  Speak to her therefore that she may help me".  She would have Mary with her in her activity which resulted from her being distracted.  She complained about Mary because she was not helping her in what she thought she ought to be doing.  Mary was with the Lord, listening to Him, seeing things as He saw them, looking down on the situation.  Martha was in the midst of the situation, wondering what she could do next to help things, as she thought.  "But Jesus answering said to her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things".  Mary was with the Lord, listening to His mind.  You might say she was doing nothing.  Sometimes, dear brethren, the less we do the better.  She was doing the most important thing of all, she was listening to His word.  "Thou art careful and troubled about many things; but there is need of one".  I would like to say it to my brethren in this area: "there is need of one", the good part that Mary chose.  "There is need of one, and Mary has chosen the good part the which shall not be taken from her".  Mary chose it.  Most of us are like Martha, let us face it; we think in terms of: What can we do? we will have to do something.  There is another way, there is the good part which the Lord commends, and Mary chose that good part.  I am sure of this: not many of us choose it but the Lord said "the which shall not be taken from her".
But in Matthew 11 the Lord invites us.  "Come to me" He says.  The Lord would invite every one of us to come to Him, "all ye who labour and are burdened" Martha laboured and was burdened.  It is good to labour and be burdened, but not as being distracted from the good part.  Who laboured like Jesus?  He mentions the cities in which most of His works of power had taken place.  Think of His labours in Bethsaida and Capernaum, His labours in Galilee!  He said 'woe!' to these cities.  It is interesting to realise that before He pronounced woe on these cities He had called out a number from them.  That is what He is doing today, the Lord is calling out individuals.  Woe to this world!  It is about to come into judgment, but the Lord is calling out persons today.  Did not Andrew and Peter and Philip all come from Bethsaida?  Think of that centurion in Capernaum concerning whom the Lord said "Not even in Israel have I found so great faith", @Luke 7:9.  The Lord secured individuals, and then pronounces woe to these cities in which His works of power had taken place because they had not repented, where there was lack of results.  The Lord said prophetically "I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought and in vain", Isa 49:4.  Was He discouraged?  Was He disappointed?  He was not.  He was with His Father, looking down on the situation; He was not in the midst of these cities, looking up to God.  "At that time, Jesus answering said, I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth".  In Luke's account of this it says "Jesus rejoiced in spirit", chap 10:21.  He was not in the midst of these cities, looking up to God; He was with God, looking down on these cities.  Oh, we need this, dear brethren.  If there is one thing we need to improve our state, this is needed.  "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes".  He was with His Father, having His Father's view of the whole situation, in communion with His Father, seeing things as He saw them.  He was able to praise His Father in this situation.  "Yea, Father", He says, "for thus has it been well-pleasing in thy sight.  All things have been delivered to me by my Father, and no one knows the Son but the Father".  We could say something about these things if we were able, but what I want to come to is "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and I will give you rest".  Are there exercises involving labour, are things burdening you, dear brother or sister?  The Lord says "Come to me".  He does not say, Look to me; He does not say, Pray to me; He says "Come to me", that is, to be with Him where He is, to see things as He sees them, to feel about things as He feels them.  "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened".
Maybe there are some persons here who labour and are burdened because of conditions.  Maybe some sisters, some widows living alone, are feeling the state and are looking up to the Lord and crying to Him.  The Lord will hear you, but there is another way and that is to be with Him, having His view of the situation.  "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and I will give you rest".  The Lord Jesus was restful in this situation, although His works of power had not had the effect they ought to have had.  He was restful with His Father viewing it all.  We can be obsessed with difficulties but this is the answer: "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and I" -- "I" He says -- "will give you rest".  "I", who found rest with His Father in this situation in this chapter, "I will give you rest" in whatever situation you find yourself.  Mary chose the good part.  Maybe we have not chosen the good part, but the good part is open to us; the Lord invites us: "Come to me".  "Come to me"; not, as I said, Pray to Me, or Cry to Me, which in itself is all right.  "Come to me... and I will give you rest".  In verse 28 rest is to be known immediately: "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and I will give you rest".  That is the way to restfulness of spirit in spite of what conditions are.  The longer-term view is "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me... and ye shall find rest to your souls".  Finding rest may be a more settled experience as a result of answering to what the Lord says: "Take my yoke upon you".  What was His yoke?  His yoke was committal to the will of His Father who is in the heavens; that was His yoke and the Lord would welcome us to be in the same yoke: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me".  Then He says "for I am meek and lowly in heart".  Where do we learn lowliness, dear brethren?  It is so difficult for us to be lowly, so easy for us to be otherwise.  We learn it as coming to Him: "learn from me".  The Lord has been spoken of here as a great model for us; we learn from Him!  "And ye shall find rest to your souls; for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light".  The Lord will not put upon us any burden we are not able to bear even if we may feel burdened, heavily burdened; "my yoke is easy", He said.  It is easy if we in our measure are committed to the will of His Father who is in the heavens as He was.  "My yoke is easy, and my burden is light".  The Lord invites us: "Come to me"; come to His side, be with Him in how He views every matter, and then if we do anything or say anything, if we write anything from this viewpoint it will help the situation.  We have valuable letters of those who have gone before us which were no doubt written from this viewpoint; I do not know if that can be said of all that we write.  "My yoke" is service under His control.  The Spirit will help us to fulfil committal to the will of His Father who is in the heavens.  May the Lord help us in these things.
In the gospel of John, chapter 12, the Lord is nearing the end of His life here.  He said "The hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified".  What was the way taken that the Son of man should be glorified?  "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit".  This is the way in which the Son of man was glorified; in His death; and the result of the death of the Lord Jesus in this character is that there is fruit like Himself, after its own kind.  We were speaking earlier about going down; we see it in the Lord Himself.  It is not so much the suffering side stressed here, nor the atoning work; it is the attitude of the Son of man, falling into the ground, dying.  It refers to His death; would it refer to His burial?  "Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit".  It bears fruit like itself, fruit like the grain of wheat that fell into the ground and died.  Therefore the Lord says immediately, "He that loves his life shall lose it, and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it to life eternal".  If there is to be fruit according to the character of the grain of wheat, how is it arrived at?  It is not arrived at without moral exercises on the part of those who are to be the fruit.  "He that loves his life shall lose it".  It is very striking how the Lord immediately says this after verse 24.  Some difficulties among us are caused because we love our lives, love ourselves, love our own ideas, love our own activities.  "He that loves his life shall lose it and he that hates his life in this world" -- very strong language!  -- "he that hates his life in this world shall keep it to life eternal".  What is in view?  That there should be fruit according to the character of the grain of wheat that fell into the ground and died.  What does it involve with us?  Moral exercises, hating of self, detesting anything that promotes self.  Do I detest anything that promotes self at the expense of the promotion of Christ?  "He that loves his life shall lose it, and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it to life eternal".  Life eternal is reached through the conclusion of moral exercises.  These are real exercises which we have to face.  It is true discipleship, true committal to our Lord Jesus Christ and His will, His yoke.  "He that hates his life in this world shall keep it to life eternal".  Then He says "If anyone serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there also shall be my servant".  Oh, what a prospect!  What an objective to have before us, to be with Him!  The Lord does not say, Where My servant is, there will I be; He says "where I am, there also shall be my servant".  It was true of Mary in Luke 10; where He was Mary was.  Martha was distracted.  I need not go over that again but these are the facts.  Mary was with Him where He was.  "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and I will give you rest".  It means that we are to be with Him where He is.  "Where I am, there also shall be my servant".  That is open to every one of us as we face the moral exercises of verse 25 and follow Him.  "If anyone serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there also shall be my servant".  The Lord was the perfect Servant; "there also shall be my servant".  That is fruit, fruit after the character of the grain of wheat.  Then the Lord adds "And if any one serve me, him shall the Father honour".  Oh, how blessed to be honoured by the Father!  The Lord was honoured by the Father distinctively, but the true fruit of the death of the Lord Jesus is to be honoured by the Father: "him shall the Father honour".  It is not honour in this world; it is not even honour among the brethren.  I have been impressed with Paul's last days.  You would have thought that a servant like Paul would have been greatly honoured among the brethren.  What a servant he was!  How devoted he was!  Localities owed their existence to Paul, under the Lord of course.  At the end of his days it does not seem that he had much honour among persons in Asia.  Onesiphorus had to seek him out; but oh, the Father honoured him.  The Father's honours, dear brethren, are worth far more than any place we may have among the brethren; that will pass away.
In chapter 13 -- these are well-known scriptures -- we have John in the bosom of Jesus.  I suppose only one could have been in the position that John was in, in the physical setting of that table.  I suppose they were lying at table, and John was lying in the bosom of Jesus.  Oh, how John would appreciate that position!  But, you know dear brethren, the bosom of Jesus is open to every one of us, each of us can know what it is to be in the bosom of Jesus.  I do not know if we know very much about it.  I do not know if I know very much about it, but at least it ought to be attractive to us.  It is a setting of love, a setting of enjoyed, experienced love, in the bosom of Jesus.  "Now there was at table one of his disciples in the bosom of Jesus, whom Jesus loved".  This is the first reference in this gospel to the disciple whom Jesus loved.  He speaks of himself later in this way, but I think I am right in saying that this is the first reference to it.  He knew Jesus' love by lying in His bosom.  That was his experience and John was in a secret that no one else had.  Everyone else said "Is it I?" (@Matthew 26:22; @Mark 14:19) according to other gospels, but John said "who is it?"  Jesus and he shared a divine secret no one else knew about.  This kind of thing is open to us, to be in the confidence of our Lord Jesus Christ.  Is anything more desirable?  This was John's position.  He was with Jesus, in the bosom of Jesus, looking round on the situation, just as Jesus was.  Then it says "leaning on the breast of Jesus, says to him, Lord, who is it?" and the Lord indicates who it is, and John and the Lord Jesus shared this secret.  We can be in the secret of things.  Only John was here, but it is open to all of us to be with the Lord, looking down on whatever situation may occur, and if we are in that setting, if we are maintained in that setting, whatever we do, whatever we say will help conditions, it will improve any situation, it will improve the state of things among us.  May the Lord help us for His Name's sake.
London
19th November 1983
{301}
SUBJECTS OF THE LORD'S INTEREST
@John 20:17-23; @Luke 24:33-43; @John 12:1-3
J.R.  The suggestion is to look again at these well­known scriptures.  The Lord came to His own in John 20; they were the subjects of His interest, the subjects of God's purpose.  The Lord came where the disciples were and the record is all what He did and what He said.  In Luke 24 the Lord stood in their midst.  It does not say He came but that He stood in their midst; again they were the subjects of His interest and of His own care; He gathered them.  The Lord came to Bethany and they did things, they made Him a supper.  Martha served, Mary took the ointment; they did everything.  What is specially in mind is John 12, where they received Him, where they did things, and everything was so acceptable to Him.  These features might engage us for our profit.  In John 20 "Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you.  And having said this, he shewed to them his hands and his side.  The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord".  They did not do anything.  It is the Lord having His way with persons who are the subjects of divine purpose and who are brought into wonderful relationship.  The Lord had said to Mary "my Father and your Father... my God and your God".  We have often gone over this ground but I thought we might see that the Lord does everything here.
E.C.B.  Is there a very blessed sense of the Lord as a servant even in conditions of great privilege like this.  As you say, He does everything; He is really serving His own, and less directly perhaps serving the Father.
J.R.  Quite so.  The disciples are not said to worship, they are not said to do anything.  It is the Lord acting, and of course we ought to have some experience of this.  It says "where the disciples were": it is the persons He has in mind.  It is all a question of His interest in them, they being the subjects of His interest; and we are all such, dear brethren.  It is good to be conscious of it.  We are all the subject of the Lord's intense interest and affection.
A.J.E.W.  Is it interesting that the Lord immediately communicates to Mary those who are the subjects of His interest: "go to my brethren"?  Mary would stand for something in that relation, the affectionate intelligence to which the Lord could confide where the circle of His interest is to be known.
J.R.  Very good.  Mary was strong in affection.  Was that in your mind?  Say more as to what Mary represents.
A.J.E.W.  We have sometimes spoken of her as suggestive of the assembly, and if we could carry that forward here, the Lord is quick to confide to the assembly, in figure, where the centre of His interest is and where these activities that you speak of are to be experienced.
J.R.  Very good.  It is a great matter to regard ourselves as the subjects of the Lord's interest.  At the moment He is with His Father in His throne.  The Father is over all in a universal sense; the nations are under His control: but the Lord's chief interest is His own, and it is good to be conscious of that, as the disciples were made to feel here.
E.O.  Would that be emphasised when it says in the next chapter that it is the third time that He manifested Himself to them, showing His intense interest in the disciples?
J.R.  Exactly.  Before the Lord ascended to His Father His own are in His mind.  "I have not yet ascended to my Father" He said to Mary; the disciples are the subjects of His intense personal interest.
D.J.H.  We were impressed this morning at the Supper that, whilst we are in the waiting time, we enter now into eternal relationships.  We do not have to wait for the experience of them.  Would that be related to this, that immediately, as out of death, He speaks of relationships that are going right through?
J.R.  Exactly.  It is "my brethren" here, and sonship: "my Father and your Father".  I suppose the Lord, when He says "my Father", is speaking in the experience and joy of sonship Himself.  "My Father", He said, "and your Father".  The Lord is distinctive in that relationship but we are brought into the same relationship.
D.J.H.  And would not "my God and your God" go right through to Revelation 21, the eternal day, God Himself being with them?
J.R.  Yes.  Of course, the Father would go through to the eternal day too.  Relationship, sonship, goes through into eternity.
D.J.H.  Yes, I was thinking that all these relationships go through.
J.R.  It seems to me that when the Lord says "my Father" He is speaking in the enjoyment of the relation of sonship; when He says "my God" he is speaking as man, and other men are to be with Him in relationship with the same God.
D.J.H.  I am sure that is right always bearing in mind the distinctive place that He has in every relationship.
J.R.  We are believers who are enlightened as to the wonderful character of these relationships.  The teaching we have had is almost ingrained in us, the light of the wonderful character of our relations with Him with the Father and with one another on this level.  Of course it belongs to all believers; but we are in the light of it and know something of the enjoyment of it.  The Lord does everything here, He caters for the subjects of His interest on the level of the greatness of divine purpose; and we are such.  As I said, all believers are such, but we have the light of this.
J.C.E.  Do you think one of the objectives that the Lord had was the perfecting of His disciples?  I was thinking of the frequent reference to disciples here, and in that sense they are the same as they were before the Lord died, but now they are disciples of One in resurrection.  Would that be something to further and complete the formation of these disciples?
J.R.  Exactly.  First of all He came to them and said "Peace be to you".  But then He sends them forth; as He was sent forth, they are sent forth.  They are sent forth from this area of His interest in them, His affection for them being realised by these persons.  Twice He said "Peace be to you" and then He sends them forth as He was sent forth.
A.J.E.W.  You speak of what He did; He did not just speak, He showed them something.  I thought it was a mark of great intimacy and of the confiding love of Christ in those in whom His interest was, as if He would suggest that that interest would not just be passing but would remain, and they were to be brought into the settled sense of relationship and intimacy with Himself.
J.R.  Yes.  He showed them Himself, His hands and His side.  I know it has been said that His side would refer to Genesis 2, and I have no doubt it does.  Nevertheless, His side is mentioned in chapter 19; the only place it is mentioned in the gospels that the spear pierced His side.  It would give them a sense of peace that everything was settled, everything was seen to.  From that side came blood and water; there was a means of solving every moral question in the blood and water that came from His side.  What assurance it would give them!  What assurance it gives us to realise that from His own side came the answer to every moral question!
D.J.H.  So you can understand that He says "Peace be to you.  And having said this, he shewed to them his hands and his side".  It was a basis for eternal peace
J.R.  Quite so.  It was the heavenly Man, the One who was about to ascend; therefore it would be heavenly peace that He brought in, with the assurance that there was a basis for the settling of every moral question that could ever arise.
P.S.W.  Chapter 19 is the witness of the one that saw it, but this is experienced in the company.  We understand from @1 Corinthians 15 that there were several personal appearings, but is it important to see the collective experience and the answer that the Lord is really looking for?
J.R.  l am sure it is.
E.P.  Experience is a very blessed matter.  The disciples' testimony was "We have seen the Lord".  Mary said that she had seen the Lord and that He had said certain things to her, but the collective experience was "We have seen the Lord".  It is really sufficient.
J.R.  It seems that all that the disciples said to Thomas was just these five words: "We have seen the Lord".  That was the testimony to one who was absent.  They have affection for him; they want him in too.  The relationship in which we are to Christ, is also the relationship in which we are to one another.  "My brethren... my Father and your Father... my God and your God".  It puts us together on the level of these wonderful, divine, eternal relationships.
E.P.  So they rejoiced together.  It says "The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord".  It was joy together, and it is a wonderful experience to rejoice together.
J.R.  Exactly.  It is a 'together' scene: "where the disciples were".  We have often gone over this section but it is good to get the impression that the Lord does all here.  He speaks and He shows them, it is from Him to them; and then the Lord looks for the result, He sends them forth.  How much has flowed from the Lord to us!
H.A.H.  The hands were the hands that had taken the basin, the water and the towel, and the feet of each one of them.  He was still serving in love, showing Himself in this way.
J.R.  It was His delight to be with them here in His resurrection, and also in the light of heaven, the light of ascension.  He would take them with Him in His affections when He ascended.
E.C.B.  Do you have in mind that we might be alert to see what the Lord Himself does as He comes among us?  Your reference to His side connecting with chapter 19, might specially connect in our minds with the cup, the Lord being with us.  Is the question for us to see what He does?
J.R.  Yes, there is no doubt that in the cup there is the assurance that from the divine side everything is settled.  We would not be in full liberty unless we had that assurance, and that is available for the very youngest, the assurance that there is a basis for everything being settled, everything being according to the divine mind.
C.B.  I was thinking of those other five words: "through fear of the Jews".  Was that a positive matter or was it protective?
J.R.  We often apply "through fear of the Jews" to the need to keep out every Jewish element, but actually the Jews had just been the means of crucifying their Lord and I can understand them closing the doors, because the Jews might be after them too.  That is the actual situation; the opposition in this gospel was very, very real, and it had been the means of crucifying their Lord, the One they followed.  There is the application, that we keep out every Jewish element, but there is a touching scene here.  They may well fear the Jews when they had crucified the Lord.
C.B.  We need spiritual eyesight for that.
J.R.  Yes we do.  The opposition is intense; it was intense here and it is at the present time.  But this is the Lord active where the disciples were in seclusion.
J.C.E.  They had to open the doors; the Lord sent them forth.  He sent them out into the very circumstances and elements that put Him to death.  I think He strengthened them by the impartation of the Spirit.
J.R.  Exactly.  It is a personal transaction here; He breathed into them.  He gave them His own breath to represent Him down here, as you say, in a scene of opposition, yet of testimony, to continue in the same breath as He was here.
R.W.F.  Is "the midst" that of which the Lord Himself is the centre?  I have wondered as to sensitivity in recognition of the Lord.  We sometimes speak of welcoming the Lord, but He was the first to speak here.  I wonder if there is that sensitivity with me which would be ready for a communication of this kind.
J.R.  I am sure that is a test and a challenge; this was actual, physical here; it is spiritual for us, which is a test to us, whether His presence is real to us.  I often wonder (I do not want to be imaginative), if the Lord actually came in, what would we do?  Would we be surprised?  His presence is to be as real as that, but it is by the Spirit.  It is meant to affect us.  As you say, we need to be sensitive.  We need to have our eye on Him.
B.W.W.  If His presence were corporeal, do you think it would make a difference in fact as to what transpired and how it worked?
J.R.  I think it would test us, whether we would be in the same liberty to take part.  The Lord could come corporeally.  He does not come that way, but He could come that way.  He comes by the Spirit and it is a test as to our reality, our affection, as well as our spirituality.  Do you think so?
B.W.W.  I am sure that is right.  I have wondered whether it might simplify what we would say, because we should be fully conscious that He heard all.  We want the brethren to hear, because we speak normally for the company, but He would hear exactly what was said and how it was said.
J.R.  There is one thing sure, if the Lord did appear corporeally we certainly would worship Him, we certainly would bow in homage together.
B.W.W.  Yes.  I have thought, in relation to this scene, that He must have been the object of every eye.  He would be there, it says, "in the midst", and in a certain sense I would think everyone else save Jesus Himself was forgotten by each of them, and if that is so with us I suppose it would bring in liberty, as well perhaps, as you say, a test maybe, but liberty too.
J.R.  Yes; it would give us appreciation of one another too.
C.B.  Could we give Him anything to eat?
J.R.  That brings us to Luke 24.  It does not say the Lord came, but "he himself stood in their midst", in the midst of persons He had to do with, in principle, in His gathering service.  If the Lord had His way with us He would gather us.  At the beginning of this chapter they are in perplexity.  That is often the way with us, things are not very clear sometimes; we are in perplexity.  But the Lord appeared to Simon, and then to these two on the way to Emmaüs who would be samples of how the Lord serves His own with a view to gathering them, so that they have the sense of belonging to the Lord and belonging to one another.  "Rising up the same hour, they returned to Jerusalem.  And they found the eleven, and those with them gathered together".  They gravitate towards the company as a result of impressions of the Lord's gathering.
C.B.  And there was a good state there to provide something for Him.
J.R.  Yes, that comes in.  Again the Lord speaks and shows them.  He stood in their midst and said to them, Peace be to you.  Then He says to them "Why are ye troubled?  and why are thoughts rising in your hearts?  behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself.  Handle me and see".  Then "having said this he shewed them his hands and his feet".  Then He said "Have ye anything here to eat?"  That means, Have you anything for Me to eat?  When He said in John 21 "Have ye anything to eat?"  He meant had they any food for themselves, but here, "Have ye anything here to eat?" is, Have you anything that I can appropriate?  They had something that they themselves had been engaged with: "part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb".
C.B.  That is a good state.
J.R.  Yes, the state improves; it does not take a long time to improve state.  If I have sinned I am in a bad state, obviously; if I repent, my state is improved immediately.  Here they were perplexed and confounded, but very soon, as you say, they had something for the Lord.
J.C.E.  You even get a good state improved here, because it says they believed not for joy.  Joy is a good state, but one tends to have oneself in view.  To believe means that there is an object of belief, which was the Lord here.  Do you think that after that mention their good state was improved?
J.R.  I am sure that is right, and there is always room for improvement.  We are told in Philippians to "abound...  more and more", chap 1:9.
J.C.E.  This gospel mentions the word eleven; it takes account of the fact that they were incomplete.  The word eleven is not used in John, it is just the disciples.  It shows special grace, that in a time of limitation the Lord was pleased to involve Himself in connection with their state and to look for something from them, as was said, something that He can partake of with them.
E.C.B.  Is it too challenging a question to ask whether we would actually recognise the Lord if He came in corporeally?
J.R.  What do you say?
E.C.B.  I think it is a question.  Both in John and in Luke He showed it was Himself by His hands and His side or His hands and His feet, and Luke refers in the Acts to "many proofs", chap 1:3.  But it does raise the question, what impression we actually have of Jesus Himself and whether we would know Him if He came among us.
J.R.  Yes, that is a challenge.  It is Jesus Himself in this chapter (v 15) and in verse 36 "he himself stood in their midst".
H.A.H.  Would this raise the question whether we can discern the features of Jesus in one another?
J.R.  Yes, and it is a challenge as to whether we really know Him personally.
E.C.B.  It is a question of what impression we have of Jesus in a glorified condition.  Just to be simple, are our impressions of Jesus just drawn from illustrations in the Bible?  What impression have we of a Man in another condition altogether?  If He came in, would we be saying, Who is this?
J.R.  We are going to see Him one day very soon and we will know Him then.
W.J.R.B.  Both in John here, and in Revelation, there is a question of turning round.  It raises the question of the present appearance of the Lord in relation to the assemblies.  In Revelation His eyes were "as a flame of fire", chap 1:14.
J.R.  That is the Lord's attitude to the public profession; the assembly publicly has failed.  The Lord appears there "girt about at the breasts with a golden girdle".  His affections are there but they are restrained because of conditions publicly.  John turned there: "having turned, I saw".  The first thing he sees is seven golden lamps, and then "in the midst of the seven lamps one like the Son of man".  Therefore it is the general public position that is in view in Revelation 1.  The Lord's affections are restrained.  It ought to be our concern, as answering to the Lord's mind for us, to know Him with His affections unrestrained in a secret way; but generally His affections are restrained.  Therefore while we ought to have love for all the saints our affections have to be somewhat restrained too because of any dishonour to the Lord in the public profession.
D.A.B.  Does it help to refer again to the thought of learning the Christ, which was in one of your scriptures yesterday?  In Revelation it was a manifestation in a form with which John was not familiar.  The manifestations at the end of the gospels seem to be in a way with which they were familiar, the Lord appeared to them as they had known Him.
J.R.  Yes.  The Lord says here "Why are ye troubled? and why are thoughts rising in your hearts? behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself".  Much depends on our personal links with Jesus Himself.
D.A.B.  I wondered if that is another aspect of His side.  That is really where we ought to be.  If we do not recognise somebody it is probably because we have not been in his company.
E.P.  It says of those two that their eyes were opened and they recognised Him.  Do you think they joined the company with opened eyes?  It says "they found themselves, and those with them, gathered together, saying, The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon"; then it says "And they related what had happened on the way".  They would say, Our eyes were opened and we recognised Him; and they brought that into the company.
J.R.  Very good.  The nearer we are to the Lord Jesus personally the more we will appreciate His own.  When they have their eyes opened they come to where the others are, they gravitate to the company.  The Lord did not tell them to go there, but when their eyes were opened and they recognised Him they say "Was not our heart burning in us...?" and "rising up the same hour, they returned to Jerusalem".
C.J.G.B.  Does this show what the Lord had in mind that He could say "I myself"?  Do you think there is something that has gone through at the Lord's supper that would bring great intimacy as we have our attention fixed upon Him?
J.R.  I am sure if we have our attention fixed on Him we will get on better together, we will get on well together locally, because this scripture is suggestive of the local setting, it is "their midst".  It is not "the midst" as in John, it is "their midst" here, in the midst of these persons who are available in that locality at that time.
G.A.P.  Would "Handle me and see" show the nearness to which the Lord Himself has come?  And would that be something to be promoted with us, to be aware of the nearness, and the reality, of His manhood?
J.R.  Quite so, "Handle me and see"; He showed them His hands and His feet.  His feet had gone after Simon; His feet had gone after these two, followed them in the wrong direction all the way to Emmaüs.  It is the grace of the Lord's gathering attitude.
A.J.E.W.  Is it interesting that, having referred to His hands and His feet, He then speaks of flesh and bones?  The hands and the feet would be the members that entered into the activity which you speak of, but the flesh and bones would really be the essential condition in which He was before them, and is it not to impart to us in some spiritual sense a peculiar impression of the tangibility of the presence of Jesus, the reality of it?
J.R.  The substantiality or tangibility: exactly.  This is what we need more than anything else, what I need more than anything else, this personal experience with Jesus Himself.
C.B.  We need also to value those two hundred volumes of ministry you were telling us about including fifty years of teaching of Mr Taylor as to Christ and the assembly.  These two in Luke 24 had Christ in their hearts and then they returned and were in the gain of the assembly.
J.R.  Yes, I have been impressed with the lavish way in which the Lord has showered teaching and ministry upon us.  It is almost like the parable in Isaiah: "What was there yet to do... that I have not done...?", chap 5:4.  There is abundance.  The Lord Jesus was the operator, the One who made the stars; I often wonder why He made so many, and I wonder why He gave us so much in the way of instruction and ministry and example.  We are enlightened and therefore responsible.
C.B.  I was impressed with the hymn we sang this morning-:
O gracious God, Thy pleasure
Is in Thy Christ made known.
(No 66)
J.R.  That is good.  The fifty years of Mr Taylor's ministry related to the local assembly and what is proper to the local assembly: the service of God, administration, relations together; fifty years of volume after volume relating mainly to local conditions.  There is no doubt in my mind that Mr Raven had a profound impression of Christ.  Read his ministry: it is Christ.  Mr Taylor had a profound impression of the assembly; these two go together and we have all that wealth.
R.W.F.  Is the question now, not how much we know by heart but how much we have in our hearts?  "Was not our heart burning...?", and the Lord raises the question: "why are thoughts rising in your hearts?".  Is it a question of the love of the truth?
J.R.  That is right.  How much are we formed by what the Lord has so lavishly given us?  Now in chapter 12 of John the Lord came, "came to Bethany".  The end of Matthew says "being in Bethany" (chap 26:6), and in Mark it is "when he was in Bethany" (chap 14:3); He happened to be there.  But here we read that He came to Bethany, came to these persons in this locality, and it would seem that they did everything.  The Lord was the object of their attention and their activity in this place.  We need to think of this, that while we appreciate being the subjects of the Lord's interest, He is to be the object of our interest and our response, as we have here.  It says "they made him a supper".  There is no word about what the Lord says or what the Lord does.  They do it, it is their appreciation of Him being manifested here.  "Martha served, but Lazarus was one of those at table with him.  Mary therefore, having taken a pound of ointment" and so on; it is what they did.  When the Lord comes to us, is He not worthy of our attention and our response in a full-hearted way?
D.J.H.  So Lazarus was one of those at table with Him.  There were others there but Lazarus was with Him.  Should we be with Him, do you think?
J.R.  It is the result of chapter 11.  They were the subjects of the Lord's affection and His interest all through chapter 11 but in chapter 12 there is a result for Him.  He is the object of their attention and activity.
D.J.H.  Yes, I was thinking of what was said earlier, that if He came into the midst our eyes would be on Him; we would lose sight of one another in that sense.  Lazarus was just with Him.
E.C.B.  They would have had to have this outlook all the time, would they not, not just on the occasion when the Lord came in?  There must have been a degree of preparation.  Mary would have had Him as an object before He actually came, and Martha invited Him because she wanted Him.
W.J.R.B.  Does death have a peculiar bearing on us?  If you have a brother sitting next to you, and the next week he has been taken, it has a profound effect upon you.
J.R.  We have just had experiences like that in our city, of much illness and the Lord taking two.  We had a double burial last Tuesday, but I think I can say the effect is that it has put us together in affection and appreciation for one another, just as these persons were here, they were together in their activities.  We can pass through other kinds of exercises where we might not be of one mind, but the Lord's dealings with us would have in mind putting us together.
D.A.B.  It does not say that Martha had much service here.  I wondered if that suggested a greater sense of readiness on her part, so that all the work that might have been a burden had already been completed, and when the Lord came things were ready.
P.S.W.  The Lord would be the object of Martha's service, not her own part in it, and Mary's service had the Lord as an object and the result was to affect the whole company, the house was filled.
E.C.B.  Had they not all proved the individual service of the Lord in chapter 11, not just as a family but each one?
J.R.  They had indeed, because the Lord had His own touch with Martha and with Mary, and of course distinctively with Lazarus.  I know this is a resurrection scene it does not go as high as John 20, but we are speaking of this setting of the Lord being the object and the Lord receiving.  The Lord caters for us in a very full way but we have the privilege of catering for Him and that is what they do here.
E.C.B.  Even if this is not on the level of John 20 does it not stimulate us to be all we can for the Lord at the level at which we are?
J.R.  That is exactly what is in mind.
C.B.  Would there be a difference between servile service and love service?
J.R.  That is right.  This is love service, service with the Lord Jesus as the object.
C.B.  In Luke 10 there is a little bit of servile service with Martha but here love takes its place.
J.R.  That is right.  The Lord brought about this change, and is He not worthy of receiving from us increasingly?
B.W.W.  Is it of some interest that before what any one of the three named ones does or how Lazarus is placed, there is this general statement "There therefore they", without saying who the 'they' are, which is a very wide expression into which we all can come?
J.R.  Exactly.  It is a collective matter.  We are all the subjects of the Lord's intense interest.  Where we come short sometimes is that the Lord is not sufficiently the object of our activities.
J.S.P.  Would it be right to suggest too that the way in which Mary moves in this chapter follows on the sitting at His feet and hearing His word (see Luke 10:39) and would that be a stimulus to us to be more occupied with Himself in order that there might be for Him that which is wrought out in us?
J.R.  Yes, that must be so, for where did Mary get this substance?  It says "Mary therefore, having taken a pound of ointment"; she must have had it.
J.S.P.  I thought she had acquired it in Luke 10.
J.R.  Quite so, and the personal experience in chapter 11 of John too, it would all be cumulative in Mary's soul and appreciation.  She had the ointment of pure nard of great price and anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped His feet with her hair which was herself.  The house was filled with the odour of the ointment.  It is all there in herself; we are to be like this.  Experiences we go through, personal sorrows, even church sorrows, are meant to yield this kind of thing.
E.C.B.  So we limit the extent of this scripture if, for instance, we confine it in our minds to the Supper, but do you not think it is a question whether we realise that in a meeting like this there is intended to be something for the Lord and for God?
C.B.  What influence we have in the house would be a good exercise.  What are we bringing so in that everybody would get the benefit of our appreciation of Christ?
J.R.  Yes, what influence and quality do we bring in.  Those of us who are getting older ought to represent this kind of thing specially, because the whole house benefited.  That would include young people.
London
20th November 1983
Key to initials
C.Beale; C.J.G.Brodie, Ealing; W.J.R.Brodie; Ealing; D.A.Burr; E.C.Burr; J.C.Evershed; R.W Flowerdew; D.J.Hutson; H.A.Hutson; E.Oliver; E.Palmer; G.A.Palmer; J.S.Pugh; J.Renton, Edinburgh; A.J.E.Welch; B.W.Ward; P.S.Warren
all local unless otherwise stated
{315}
THE LORD'S VICTORY AND HIS SYMPATHY
@Judges 14:14; @John 11:33-36
Our sister has fallen asleep through Jesus.  As our brother said in prayer, it is an experience none of us has yet had, but for her it is an experience of bliss, we may be assured of that.  We are in the presence of the article of death, but what makes all the difference to the believer when he faces death is to appreciate that the Lord Jesus has lain in death.  Samson's riddle says, "Out of the eater..." -- the eater is death, the great devastator of mankind.  Think of all the sorrows that have resulted from this mighty eater, the great enemy, because death is spoken of as an enemy in @1 Corinthians 15:26.  This great enemy has devastated mankind from Abel, whom we understand was the first to die, right down to the present day.  But there was one death that was different, the death of the Lord Jesus Christ.  He was the only One whose life was not forfeited.  All our lives are forfeited because of the disobedience of the first Adam; the whole race is under the penalty of death; but there was One blessed Man here whose life was not forfeited, the only One who had a right to live; but that blessed, holy, unique Man went into death.
"Out of the eater", out of the desolator, has come food.  Who could have thought that death would yield?  but the death of the Lord Jesus has yielded a wondrous living throng.  It has brought in life, it has brought in food for the believer.  The Lord said, "He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life eternal" (John 6:54); "He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him",  John 6:56.  The death of the Lord Jesus provides food for the believer, "Out of the eater came forth food, and out of the strong", out of the strength of death, "came forth sweetness".  Think of the sweetness of knowing our sister's present experience, sweetly fallen asleep through Jesus, the Lord Jesus being instrumental in putting our sister to sleep.  How sweet to think of that!
"Out of the eater came forth food, and out of the strong" -- death -- "came forth sweetness".  Life, true life, life according to God, has come out of the death of the Lord Jesus.  It is wonderful to think of our Lord Jesus Christ as a mighty Conqueror over death.  He invaded that empire.  He came out of it victorious.  He stepped out of that tomb in life out of death, and believers share that same life with Him.  "Quickened together with him" (Col 2:13) means that we are made to live in His life, and it all results from the death of the Lord Jesus and His coming out in resurrection.  We were reading last night of the Lord saying, "I am the resurrection and the life", John 11:25.  Life was inherent in our Lord Jesus Christ; resurrection was inherent in Him.  Death could not hold Him.  The miracle was that He died; it was no miracle that He arose, knowing who He is, because resurrection was inherent in Him.  What a mighty Conqueror!  What a Saviour to know and to trust and to love!
But we see in John 11 that while the Lord Jesus is the mighty Conqueror over death, He is by no means aloof from the feelings of sorrow through which we pass.  He knows what sorrows are.  We read this touching verse, "Jesus therefore, when he saw her weeping" -- that is, Mary -- "and the Jews who came with her weeping, was deeply moved in spirit".  How many here are deeply moved in spirit, especially those who sorrow most; our beloved brother the husband of our sister, and her mother, are deeply moved in spirit.  Others too are deeply moved in spirit.  Let us remember that the Lord Jesus Himself "was deeply moved in spirit, and was troubled".  Think of the trouble there has been, the awful desolation, death ending forever what is natural.  The natural is sweet and is of God, but death ends it forever, but the Lord Jesus has feelings, such feelings for each person who is in sorrow at this time.  He is now living, exalted, a glorious Man, but He is the same Jesus as He was here, "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come", Heb 13:8.  He would have us know His sympathies, His compassions, His feelings for us.  He has actually taken our sister, but He is not aloof from the feelings that result in persons who have such a deep sense of loss.
May we all appreciate, may we all know better, our Lord Jesus Christ, and how He can draw near.  What a heart He has!  Our great High Priest is able to sympathise.  There is nothing of sorrow that we go through that the Lord Jesus Himself has not gone through.  He is not in sorrow now, therefore He is able to devote all His attention and provide all the sympathy that is needed for those that are going through these experiences.
So it says, "Jesus wept".  Think of that; He shed tears.  There has been a blessed, holy Man here who has shed tears, in perfection feeling the sorrows that result from death, that eater, that devourer of mankind.  The Lord Jesus wept, and He would give us a sense of how near He can be to us, how deep His feelings are.  May we all know something about it!  As our brother has said, we are all among the mourners today, but there are those who feel, and will feel, the sorrow most.  There is sorrow today, and if the Lord does not come for us soon there are days ahead -- maybe months ahead -- when the effects of this desolator will be felt, but the Lord's presence is to be known.  There is a throne of grace available.  "Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help", Heb 4:16.  Whatever season it is, there is grace, the personal grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, available to each one of us.  May we know more of it, for His Name's sake.
Edinburgh
24th February 1984
At a burial meeting
{318}
KNOWN OF GOD
@Genesis 18:17-19; @Exodus 4:14; @Daniel 9:20-23 (to "beloved")
Paul, in writing to the Corinthians, said "if any one love God, he is known of him", @1 Corinthians 8:3.  God knows those who love Him, who consider for Him; He has a special interest and has confidence in such persons.  So we have these three men, Abraham, Aaron and Daniel, (no doubt there are more) whom God knew and whom He could trust.  Surely we all would like to be men whom God could trust.  Abraham believed God and obeyed.  When the call of God came he "went out, not knowing where he was going", Heb 11:8.  He was a man of faith, and here we find that God will not hide from Abraham what He was doing.  God found a confidant in Abraham.  What a wonderful thing that is!  God is looking for such persons today.  It may be that they are comparatively few.  Think of the great number of believers there are in the world today; we need to think about and to pray for all our fellow believers, but it may be there are comparatively few whom God can trust and who could be initiated into God's present mind.  "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?"  God is looking for persons He can confide in, make His mind known to.  It requires faith and obedience on our part.  There was a consistency with Abraham.  "For I know him", God says.  God knew Abraham and could trust him.  "I know him that he will command his children and his household after him"; that is, he could trust Abraham to pass on the testimony to the next generation unimpaired.  That would be an exercise, especially with those of us who are older.  Abraham was at a good age here, and he was thinking of what was committed to him as we have to think of what is committed to us:  what has come down to us by the faithfulness of those who have gone before us in the testimony.  Is the truth going to be passed on to the next generation without any impairment?  That is what God could trust Abraham with.  He knew him: "I know him", I know he will do this.  There will be no impairment of the testimony as far as Abraham is concerned.  It will be passed on to the next generation in its fulness.  That is a word for all of us who are older, I am sure, because there is always a tendency for a gradual deterioration to take place.  "I know him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice".  We would like to be assured that these features will be passed on, for they will only be passed on if we ourselves exemplify these very features: "keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice".  That would be a responsibility on every one of us.  We need to desire that God would know us and trust us that such may be the case, not only in what we say but also in what we are, our conduct, as Abraham in his conduct exemplified the truth, the testimony, at that time, and would pass it on to those who would follow him.  We look for the Lord to come very soon; nevertheless we have to think of the testimony continuing if the Lord is pleased that the testimony should continue.
So with Aaron, Jehovah says regarding him; "I know that he can speak well".  There was the need for one to strengthen Moses who felt his weakness, but he went too far in feeling his weakness.  Jehovah called him to do something and he felt how weak he was, how unsuitable he was, and no doubt it would be good if we all felt our weakness.  It is not good to feel we are able for anything, but Moses felt that he was not the one to be called for the responsibility that God was putting upon him.  He went too far, the length to which Moses went protesting how unsuitable he was amounted to unbelief, for God knew what He could make of him; yet in consideration for him He said: "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?  I know that he can speak well".  Moses thought he could not speak well enough, but God knew one who could speak well.  No doubt Aaron was a man of prayer and God heard him speaking.  How important it is that we should be men of prayer, men of dependence.  Aaron the Levite thy brother must have known what dependence upon God was.  He appears suddenly on the scene here but he no doubt had had a history with God in his 83 years.  God says "I know that he can speak well".  No doubt He had heard him consistently speak in prayer.  How much the feature of prayer is needed at the present time!  It says "Persevere in prayer (Col 4:1), and pray unceasingly", @1 Thessalonians 5:17.  Expressing our dependence to God pleases Him; He takes account of it and He appreciates it as he does with Aaron here.  "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?  I know that he can speak well.  And also behold, he goeth out to meet thee; and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart".  Then it says of Aaron: "he went and met him on the mountain of God and kissed him", v 27.  His heart responded to Moses, it is the brotherly covenant, the brotherly relation, two working together.  How important that is, Moses and Aaron working together, two brothers working together; in fact, in this case, the one being the complement of the other.  This is important if we are to be trustworthy.  They were regarded as trustworthy by God.  He kissed him.  That is the relationship between these two brothers who are right.  They represented one thing.  How important that is!  Moses and Aaron are often spoken of as together; two persons able to work together in view of what God had in mind.
So with Daniel, he was not only known but he was greatly beloved, greatly beloved in heaven.  Why was he beloved?  Because he was exercised to represent the state that God was looking for at the moment.  In chapter 9 he "understood by the books that the number of the years, whereof the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, the prophet, for the accomplishment of the desolations of Jerusalem, was seventy years", v 2.  He was intelligent as to what Jehovah was doing.  He was exercised to represent the secret, humble state that what God had in mind should be accomplished.  Then in verse 3: "I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes; and I prayed unto Jehovah my God, and made my confession, and said, Alas Lord! the great and terrible God".  He takes this place of repentance and supplication and humility.  How much we need that at the present time!  God is pleased with this condition.  I remember a word given in this area on @Isaiah 57:15; "For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, and whose name is Holy: I dwell in the high and holy place, and with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones".  Daniel takes a low place here.  It would become us at the present time to take a very low place.  We ought to be the humblest believers in Christendom.
Then we find in the portion read that he was strengthened: "And whilst I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before Jehovah my God for the holy mountain of my God; whilst I was yet speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, flying swiftly, touched me... And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, Daniel, I am now come forth to make thee skilful of understanding".  Daniel was exercised to be in the current of what God was doing at that particular moment, therefore he received great light.  The book of Daniel is full of instruction as to what God will do after the church is taken.  It was all opened up to him because of the suited state of humility.  He is spoken of as one greatly beloved.
We need on the one hand to be with God, entrusted by Him to maintain the testimony un-impaired.  We need to be in prayer and work together as Moses and Aaron worked together.  And we need to be suitably humbled because of the ruin of things publicly and also the way in which we have contributed to the ruin.  Such persons are known of God, appreciated by Him, and are trusted by Him, and loved by Him.  May it be the portion of each one of us!
Plainfield
24th April 1984





















